THE REVIVAL OF AESTHETICS

My reader is probably familiar with an institution called an egg-and-spoon race. If so, he will be acquainted with the superior effectiveness of meticulous over spectacular methods.

My present undertaking I regard as my own turn in some relay-race of that sort.

Mathematicians and Physicists have, as the result of cautious and well-calculated endeavour, forged far ahead in the race and already vanished beyond the ken of the ordinary layman.

My own egg I find lying somewhere not far off from the starting-point, spilled first in this direction and then in that by the all-too-ample gestures of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. It has only been replaced anywhere near its own track by my immediate predecessors. What then more natural than that my efforts to advance it a few feet should be characterised by the ungainly attitudes of extreme circumspection ?

Moreover, the Truth, as Wilde wrote, “‘is rarely pure and never simple.” The first phrase merely dates the dictum, but the second remains, I fear, permanently valid. I shall therefore make no further apology either for pedestrian progress or for the introduction of complicated conceptions into a subject which I regard as having hitherto suffered much from over-confident and oversimplified treatment.

First, we must make a preliminary survey of our subject.The single word “ Art” denotes a whole sequence of events. In the first place, something happens in the artist’s mind which causes him to create (a second stage) certain material productions—sounds, shapes, or linguistic symbols, for example—which in their turn have the power of reacting in a particular way upon the minds of other people.

We may tabulate the sequence thus :—

FIRST STAGE.: EVENTS IN MIND OF AN INDIVIDUAL WHICH IMPEL HIM TO CREATE | 

SECOND STAGE.: CERTAIN MATERIAL PRODUCTIONS WHICH EVOKE 

THIRD STAGE.: AESTHETIC PLEASURE IN THE MINDS OF OTHER INDIVIDUALS.

To begin then at the first stage, What do we know about the mental events preceding artistic creation ? Common sense tells us that the artist’s activity is a means of “expressing his emotions.” So here we have one answer. Common sense would suggest “ emotions ” as the content of the first stage. Such an answer has, however, the following deficiencies :—

(a) All emotions in all people clearly do not lead to art, therefore we must have omitted some crucial factor.

(b) Much of the content of art falls outside any possible definition of emotion. Pictures contain images of “things,” and linguistic art contains “ thoughts.” It is only reasonable to assume that these images and thoughts pre-existed, in the mind of the artist, his material production.

Accordingly the first stage of the aesthetic experience, when illuminated by the light of common sense, provokingly reveals enough complexity to baffle simple summarisation, but withholds any glimpse of that fundamental force which manipulates these miscellaneous ingredients, the active aesthetic faculty.

Attempts have of course been made to explain away in a sophisticated manner the apparent complexity of what we may call art’s mental raw material. Croce provides the most plausible instance. Following Bergson, he divides mental processes into two categories—the intuitive (or pre-conceptual) and the conceptual. Art, according to him, is the method of expression appropriate to the intuitive processes. It would be quite outside the scope of this essay to embark upon a detailed criticism of Croce’s theory. The extreme vagueness of his psychological conceptions excludes the possibility of definite proof or disproof.

I will therefore go no farther than to point out that the present trend of psychological research fails to confirm his basic antithesis of conceptual and non-conceptual processes. In fact, the “‘ Gestalt” psychologists are concerned specifically to contradict some of the assumptions which it involves — the conception, for example, that unsophisticated vision is a sort of photographic image of chaotic complexity from which the intellect extracts order. They maintain that without “ configuration ” (i.e. orderly form of some sort) sensation simply cannot exist.

It is, however, as I have said, impossible in this essay to follow out such lines of thought. I must state dogmatically that Croce comes into conflict with the whole trend of present-day psychology.

What then, it will naturally be asked, have the scientists got to offer us in lieu of intuition as the type of mental event expressed by art ? Or must we resign ourselves to the conclusion that art may express any and every type of mental event, so that its specific nature resides solely in the way in which it expresses things, and not at all in the nature of the things expressed ?

To such questions I suggest the following answer : That there is indeed a type of mental event which predominantly forms the raw material of art, and that the nature of this type may be best understood by considering an antithesis which has recently received much attention from the psycho-analytic school, the antithesis between the subjective and objective elements of consciousness.

Even the most cursory introspection will demonstrate to anyone that his mental impressions may be divided into a procession, so to speak, and a background. The procession is composed of more or less clear-cut thoughts and perceptions, the background is composed of a blurred patterning, which we may call general emotional condition. In fact the tendency of naive introspection is, we are now assured by psychologists, to overestimate the difference between emotion and those more clear-cut elements which they term “ cognition.” Emotion seems to be regarded as a survival of some earlier, less explicit, form of awareness, a sort of lower level of sensation and imagery to which all impressions sink which are too vague to be classed as cognitive.

Now it is to this amorphous type of awareness that the term subjective may be most confidently applied, for we think of our emotions as a very intrinsic, or, as one may say, “central,” part of ourselves, while we regard our cognitions as the reflection, in the mental mirror, of external (or “‘ objective ”) Reality.

I shall be concerned to maintain that this most subjective stratum of mind is the one predominantly expressed by art, and that the element of art which expresses it is that which modern aestheticians refer to as “ significant,” “pure,” or “ abstract ” Form.

This line of argument, however, we must not, for the moment, follow up. We have already admitted our liability to deal with the cognitive items which appear in art.

The question, therefore, which next arises is: Can we include these items within any single distinctive category ?

Again I think the antithesis between subjectivity and objectivity will furnish us with a clue.

We are dealing, let us recall, with the things represented in pictures regarded as “ real things,” not as mere shapes, and with the thoughts of literature regarded as thoughts, not as mere sound. Music and non-representational plastic art, if such really exists, have dropped out of the question.

Now I suggest that we can establish an antithesis between things-and-thoughts arranged subjectively and the same ingredients arranged objectively. To arrange them objectively seems to me to be the scope of science, understood in such a wide sense as to include all practical activity.

Art, on the other hand, is a particular (and very rare) variety of the numerous sorts of phenomenon in which things-and-thoughts are subjectively arranged. These other sorts include dreaming, hallucination, fancy, and so forth.

I will illustrate my point with an example. Suppose a man to be keeping a diary of his children’s development for his own amusement, he would doubtless put down only that which appealed to some aspect or other of his parental pride, and might even let his imagination, spurred by the same force, run away with him. His selection, that is to say, would be subjective. And out of such diaries perhaps one in a million would be a work of art.

Now oppose to these instances the case of a man attempting to keep a scientific record of his child’s development as a piece of psychological research.

His own feelings immediately become irrelevant. He must record the humiliating as well as the creditable, the dull as well as the amusing. His outlines must follow the outlines of hard fact. That is to say, his attitude must be purely objective. To call the statistical tables thus accumulated potential works of art is to pervert language.

Or again, oppose the case of the painter who puts things in and leaves things out just as he wishes, or even groups together a purely imaginary collection of them, to that of the map-maker, whose minutest line must conform to the pattern of “actual fact.” Clearly the former must be classed with the fanciful diarist, the latter with the scientific observer.

Accordingly, I think we may accept the conclusion that art is predominantly an expression of subjective mental elements, and science predominantly an expression of objective ones.

Art tells us principally about the Universe viewed from one particular standpoint—the Universe in which bags grow heavier the longer one carries them, and the moon may be bigger than the sun. Science seeks to standardise by eliminating all causes of distortion and establishing a system of “ real” weights and “ real ” sizes.

These generalisation are, however, far from absolute. To a certain extent the arrangement of things and thoughts in art is tied to objective reality. It will be one of our tasks later on to discuss the exact extent of this tie. Moreover, though this does not really concern our problem, no doubt all science humanly conceivable is mingled with a certain alloy of subjectivity, a fact of which scientists themselves grow continuously more aware.

At any rate, we are now in a position to summarise the first stage of art as follows : That it consists primarily of the emotional background of consciousness, and secondarily of certain cognitive items— “ images of things-and-thoughts,” as we may colloquially call them—arranged in a particular manner, which we have agreed to call “ subjective” ; a manner, that is to say, dictated more by the proclivities of the individual than by a regard for the fundamental structure of the universe, impersonally interpreted.

Further, I shall attempt to show that there is a certain correlation primarily between Emotion and Form, and secondarily between Cognition, subjectively arranged, and Content, in art.

Once again it may be of assistance to represent our conceptions schematically :

MENTAL EVENTS. THEIR EXPRESSION.

COGNITION OBJECTIVELY ARRANGED. SCIENCE.

COGNITION SUBJECTIVELY ARRANGED, SUBJECT-MATTER IN

EMOTION. SIGNIFICANT FORM IN ART

It may, perhaps, be as well to recall at this point that our analysis of the mental events preceding the creation of art is still incomplete in one exceedingly important respect, for we have made no definite suggestion as to the nature of the active aesthetic faculty which distinguishes artists from other men.

Such a suggestion will emerge when we turn, as we must now do, from the consideration of that which works of art express to the consideration of how they express it — from the raw material to the mechanism.

With regard to the mechanism of expression I shall assume, as is usually done, that it displays a polarity between the natural and the conventional, and I shail attempt to show that natural expression predominantly deals with subjective material and conventional expression with objective material, and that art is a special instance —the most elaborate known form—of natural expression, while science is the apotheosis of conventional expression. Conventional expression is not difficult to analyse. Ratiocination naturally comprehends its own products. The device of symbolism by prearrangement seems sufficiently self-explanatory, whether it is a question of semaphore signals, algebraic formulz, or scientific terminology in general.

But no such atmosphere of certainty surrounds natural expression. Until quite recently few attempts have been made to enlarge or improve upon the hints thrown out by Darwin, who, naturally enough, regarded only that aspect of it which seemed immediately relevant to his evolutionary theories. His preoccupation with regard to every function he examined was: ‘“ Would this be useful in dodging or downing enemies?” and he succeeded in attributing a vestigiary usefulness of this sort to many reactions which had always been classified as expressive.

Lips are retracted in anger as a vestige of our primitive use of teeth as weapons, hair stands on end in order to terrify an opponent by adding to apparent stature, and so forth. All this may be true enough, but it in no way excludes the hypothesis of the Gestalt psychologists who assume that expressions of emotion in some subtle sense resemble the “‘ configuration ” of the emotion expressed, a conception with which I am in sympathy and to which I shall recur. In fact, Darwin’s hypothesis really only amounted to suggesting that much which had previously been classed as expression ought logically to have been classed as practical reaction of a superseded type.

The basis of my own hypothesis will be that a resemblance between the mental event expressed and the outward vehicle of expression is the fundamental principle of natural expression.

I shall therefore be concerned to argue, in the first instance, that it is possible for the material facts which we have called “ significant form” to resemble the mental facts which we have called “ emotion,” for we postulated emotion as the primary component of the mental stuff which works of art express.

I hope that I in no way underrate the paradoxical air which such a proposition presents.

It leaps the gulf between mind and matter with a suspicious agility. It has, however, a certain amount of scientific support.

When it first occurred to me, some two or three years ago, as the sole possible key to the principal. problem of aesthetics, I was quite unaware how much scientific support it already had.

Since then I have become acquainted with the theories of the Gestalt psychologists, and cannot help being struck by the fact that their researches into the basis of mental functioning, founded upon a considerable mass of practical observation, have led them even further in the same direction than I should dare to follow.

Here, for instance, is a fair example of their tenets, from Koffka’s Growth of Mind. ‘The inverted commas denote that he, in his turn, is quoting Kohler.

““If we were to represent behaviour graphically by means of a time-curve, the behaviour of fright might show an abrupt rise in the curve, followed by a gradual fall. ‘The dynamics of the phenomenal or mental processes accompanying this behaviour would then be indicated by a curve of essentially the same character—and so would a purely electro-motor process in a photo-electric element when it is suddenly and briefly exposed to the light.” Now let us assume that the terms “ abrupt rise”? and “gradual fall,” used in these three Cases, are not merely analogous, but are in some sense identical, ‘then, in principle at least, it is possible that a material relation exists between the mental processes of a living creature, and the total impression made by movements of the creature’s limbs upon one who witnesses the moyement.” ‘The connection between emotion and movement, including instinctive movements, is thus conceiyable in a way which includes an understanding of the expressive movements.

In our first chapter it was noted that certain real entities of behaviour correspond to the total impression which an animal’s behaviour makes upon us. In addition to other characteristics, no less important in solving this problem, every form of behaviour has a certain articulation or phrasing. ‘This articulation issues from a similar articulation of the central nervous processes of the acting individual. This central articulation in turn corresponds to the individual’s “ experience ” which is articulated in a like manner. Thus the perception in the mind of an onlooker, if it be so constituted as to embrace what is going on in the reagent, must itself possess a similar articulation. And hence the experience of the reagent A, and of the observant B, must resemble each other.

Kohler elucidates this point with a striking example : When a pianist moved by his feelings articulates a series of muscular innervations with varying degrees of phrasing, fixed time-relations are determined in the series of soundwaves which constitute a sort of physical projection of the phrasing of his muscular innervations, thus conditioning in the mind of the listener an articulated auditory process which closely resembles the pianist’s own nervous articulations.

These are the assumptions which Koffka and Kohler make, in order to explain the fact that recognition of facial expression and expressive gesture is a very primitive mental fact, attained to by apes and infants.

It will at once be seen how closely these assumptions correspond with those forced upon the aesthetician who finds himself confronted with the fact that certain sounds and certain shapes are renderings of emotion recognisable without any considerable element of prearranged convention. But, as I have already said, the Gestalt psychologists seem to me to have rushed ahead somewhat rashly in a desire to state their case as simply as possible. We cannot be sure, for instance, that there is, scientifically speaking, a simple indivisible emotion corresponding with the idea of “fright.” Still less can we assign to such an emotion a definite “ configuration” expressible in words. Rejecting, therefore, this strictly schematic sort of resemblance, while clinging to the general principle, let us see what progress we can make by means of a glance at modern theories regarding the nature of emotion.

Previously to the final years of the nineteenth century psychologists assumed that emotion was a separate function of mind, consisting of quite different “ stuff ” from that which constitutes other mental processes.

This assumption was first questioned by William James and Lange, who simultaneously suggested that in the “ coarser ”? emotions, at any rate, such as grief, rage, and fear, the conscious element of the emotion consists of an awareness of the physical reactions—crying, staring, trembling, and so forth - which accompany these mental disturbances. As James playfully put it, “it would be truer to say that we are sorry because we cry, than that we cry because we are sorry.”

In its crudest form this hypothesis is open to a hundred obvious objections, but later research, by enlarging our knowledge of the more subtle physical reactions accompanying emotional disturbance, has placed it on a firmer footing. It seems, at any rate, quite reasonable to suppose that one ingredient of violent emotion is an awareness of certain changes in bodily secretion. We can well imagine such an awareness having just that vagueness and intensity which characterises intense emotion.

But there have been recent researches which have attacked the analysis of emotion from a different angle. The study of morbid psychology by psychoanalysts has revealed a close co-ordination between the phases of emotion displayed in depressive-manic insanity (an unreasonable swing of mood between gloom and elation) and the phases of the patient’s repressed, semiconscious, stream of imagery. M‘Curdy sets forth the evidence on this point at some length in his recent Psychology of the Emotions. He reaches the conclusion that conscious emotion is a mixture of vague visceral sensation, such as we have already mentioned, and vague awareness of unsanctioned streams of imagery pursuing their course in some remote recess of the mind.

As far, therefore, as the latest writers carry us we seem justified in assuming that the stuff of which emotion is made is just such stuff as that which constitutes the other mental processes, apart from its peculiar lack of what we may call precise outline. So much for its static aspect. But, as in all mental processes, there is another equally important aspect to be considered, the dynamic one. It has for a long time been recognised that our one clue to the grouping of emotional phenomena is the grouping of instincts. I think a little introspection — the only real test — will bring most people into agreement with the two propositions: (1) that all emotion is due either to the successful, or thwarted, progress of an instinctive motivation of some sort, and (2) that the individual qualities of different emotions correspond with differences in the following factor—which particular motivation, or blend of motivations, is concerned in each particular instance. Perhaps the most complete exposition of this idea is in M‘Dougall’s Social Psychology. But we need not here concern ourselves with any particular set of formule. For our purposes it is sufficient to assume that emotion consists of vague impressions patterned, or, as the Gestalt psychologists would say, “ configurated ” by the particular instinct, or combination of instincts, which happen at the moment to be active.

What we require for our hypothesis is some aspect of sounds and shapes which will be capable of representing the various modes of arrangement characterising these miscellaneous entities whose principal quality is vagueness.

Obviously we are dealing with material which takes us right away from the clear-cut impressions of sophisticated perception—the sort of awareness, for example, which tells us that our blotting-pad is rectangular and measures about 9 inches by 1 foot, or that the bird outside the window is a water-wagtail. Let us then seek our analogy in such impressions as lack the full precision and elaboration of ordinary cognitive consciousness, without falling into a sufficient degree of vagueness to become classed as emotion. For it is conceivable that in these instances we shall find consciousness reverting to some rudimentary stage in its development relevant to our problem.

Consider, for example, my visual impression of things too small to be clearly visible yet too large to be wholly outside the range of sight—the little filaments, for example, which, as a microscope will tell me, make up my blotting-paper. The impression which they make upon my consciousness is one of texture. This impression seems to me curiously like the impression which my emotions make upon consciousness. It is perfectly individual. I should know the surface of blotting-paper, whatever its colour or size happened to be. Yet it is, from the point of view of sophisticated consciousness, vague. No words which I could formulate would enable me to transfer to an English-speaking inhabitant of Mars the power to recognise blotting-paper at a glance, whereas I could easily tell him the difference between “ foolscap ” and “ imperial.”” We have then, it seems to me, through the sense of texture, a glimpse into that region of rudimentary impression where emotions and perceptions most nearly meet.

But we have considered one only of the possible factors which may deprive perception of its full development — small size. Brief duration occurs to me as another factor of this sort. Suppose, for example, that the bird outside, instead of keeping still to be looked at, flies away the moment I turn towards it. I might still be able to classify it simply by an impression of its mode of movement when in flight. Yet, once again as in the case of texture, this impression would be impossible to analyse into definite units, since any given instant of the bird’s flight has been too brief for separate observation as a single pose.

Now I suggest that in mode of movement we have a second type of rudimentary impression, once more very comparable to the sort of impression which emotion makes upon consciousness, and that different modes of movement, as suggested by sound, colour, and form, may possess a recognisable resemblance to different phases of emotion. I am not suggesting that this translation of emotional flux into terms of plasticity or sound-structure is, except to a very limited degree, a normal function of the human mind. Were it so, we should all be artists. We do, as I see matters, all possess it in certain of its simpler forms, such as facial expression and involuntary gesture. The inflection of our daily speech, too, involves much natural expression curiously intermingled with the conventional use of words and meanings. For example, when a stranger in a railway carriage tells me, while sleet pours against the pane and wind howls through every chink in the compartment, that the weather is nasty, I cannot suppose that the vocal utterance he has made is in essence a transfer of information, as when some one says to me “ you ought to have changed at Crewe.” I must assume rather that it is a piece of abstract sound expressive of some phase (presumably gregarious) in his emotional state. The words which accompany this sound-structure are simply, like the burden of a corrupt ballad, bereft of sense.

The crucial difference between the artist and the ordinary mortal which emerges from my hypothesis is this, that, while the ordinary mortal in ordinary gesture and conversation makes a shape- and sound-structure which roughly resembles the outstanding features of his emotional flux, the artist pushes the elaboration of his rendering much farther. It is not difficult to envisage the dance as a development of spontaneous gesticulation. But my contention is that we must go a step farther and envisage the significant form of a picture as accomplishing a sort of dance, imitative of the emotion which it serves to express.

Again, it is not difficult to envisage song as a development of expressive vocal inflection. But here, too, I see no reason for shrinking from the conclusion that all musical art is an extension of the same principle, the principle of rendering emotional flux in terms of suggested movement up and down the range of pitch and intensity.

If we accept these suppositions we are in a position to define the creative aesthetic faculty. It must be a sort of faculty of unconscious transposition, which, by the mediation of certain qualities which I have termed texture and mode of movement, translates a phase of emotional flux into terms of sound or shape.

Such an hypothesis goes some way towards explaining the phenomena of artistic inspiration.

The musician finds himself obsessed by certain arrangements of sound, and the painter by certain arrangements of shape and colour. Each is completely in the dark concerning the origin of his obsession, and knows nothing about it except that it demands peremptorily to be externalised. Is not this exactly what we should expect if these obsessive arrangements were really renderings, formed by a faculty working outside consciousness, of the patternings formed in the background of the mind by the functioning of fundamental motivations? One could even explain the compulsion towards externalisation by the essentially centrifugal character of instincts—their tendency, I mean, to pass into the outer world of physical action.

Again this hypothesis renders the rarity of artistic genius very explicable. For a faculty of transposition so little related to the exigencies of daily life may well be as rare as the faculty, known to science but not widespread, of discerning prime numbers without the conscious intervention of intellect.

A third point upon which I think that my hypothesis throws some light is the superiority of musical sound over mere noise as a medium of expression. Why, it may well be asked, should pure sound transcend mixed sound as a medium of expression to the degree by which song transcends the abstract-sound element of speech? My answer is that if both sorts of expression are renderings of mental events into modes of movement suggested by sound, then it will be easily understood that the richest resources of suggestion are possessed by sound subdivided into a finite range of pitch-qualities, so that complexity can be attained without chaos.

I must not, of course, be understood to mean that the object of notation is to facilitate intellectual analysis. The moment we cease regarding a piece of music as an expressive whole and try to isolate separate notes, we cease to obtain from it any impression of an aesthetic sort. My point is that systematised sound provides the creative faculty with squared blocks, as it were. Noise provides only building-stone in the rough, units too irregular to fulfil any refined constructional purpose. It may reasonably be questioned why this principle of orderly notation seems to have no equivalent in the realm of shape and colour sufficiently within the range of comprehension to be described and analysed. An American, Professor Hambidge, has indeed detected some sort of proportionscale employed in Classical Greek art, but both he, and all other investigators of similar phenomena that I have ever come across, tend to ruin their research by aiming at the impossible. ‘They have it ever in view to discover some formula for absolute Beauty, instead of limiting their scope to the particular simplifications by means of which particular individuals or groups have square-hewed their units of construction. They are, in fact, direct descendants of the early aesthetician who discovered that composition should be “ serpentine, triangular, and divided by one, two, and three.”

If I may indulge in prophecy, I anticipate that the twentieth century will see many attempts to derive bases for decorative design from geometrical units, and, probably in conjunction with these, an effort to employ colour-cinematography in the service of a new art of abstract colour. At any rate, I am convinced that what is generally called colour-harmony contains a preponderant element of what should be called colour-melody, i.e. expressive movement up and down the colour-scale. To return, however, to expressive movement of form in plastic art.

The first element which occurs to me is what we may call the cursive aspect of form, by which I mean the tendency of the original manual movements which fashioned the work to imprint upon that work traces which an observer may reconstruct in terms of expressive gesture.

This element is, of course, very conspicuous in works which have been boldly handled, while in a miniature style it merges into the question of texture.

The second is the element of suggested movement which the human mind tends to import into all questions of shape. Language is full of metaphors which prove the prevalence of this tendency.

Ground “rises” to a peak and then “ falls away suddenly ” without a literal cataclysm. A row of trees is said to “ go’ in a straight line. ‘This property of form, its power to suggest movement, has engaged the attention of exstheticians from very early times. Hogarth suggested that Beauty led the eye through the mazes of an intricate and enjoyable dance. In the middle of the ninsieenth century Lipps added the suggestion that the process is one of personification—Linfublung,—and that we imagine ourselves to be executing the movements which we attribute to the shapes we are looking at. This doctrine, which seems sound enough as far as it goes, was elaborated—I should hesitate to say “ improved upon ”’—by the later “ empathists ” in England.

They encumbered it with a theory of eye-movement, and envisaged aesthetic enjoyment as a sort of involuntary Swedish drill, resulting in a better physical tone for the whole system. The tide of their speculation was, however, soon checked by some American laboratory work which showed that their assumptions concerning eyemovement were wholly fallacious.

Both Lipps and his disciples seem to me to have suffered principally from the fault which beset almost all aestheticians previous to Croce. They overlooked the distinction between the pleasure evoked by natural objects and the pleasure evoked by art. Consequently they plunged straight into the middle (or end, rather) of the aesthetic problem—the effect produced by the work of art—and began asking what sort of shapes do people enjoy looking at ? whereas they might more profitably have begun at the beginning and asked: “‘ How is it that any one is able to use form as a medium of emotional expression ? ”’

They would then, I believe, have found themselves forced to conclusions similar to those here put forward. They would have seen that we get no farther by asserting that certain shapes “lead us a dance,” unless we can explain the fundamental nature of dancing.

Now obviously the problem of why people dance is inseparable from the problem of why they dither with their fingers when agitated, and so forth. And the “ Gestalt ” explanation that finger-dithering is really an externalised copy of the muddled mental events which constitute “ feeling distracted,” seems to me far the most convincing yet put forward. I do not therefore see how the conclusion is to be avoided that, when forms in art affect us by means of suggested movement, our mental reaction is really a recognition of the original emotion in the artist’s mind which those forms represent. Why his substantiation of those forms, and our recognition of them, should be pleasurable processes is a question which we shall attack at a later stage of our argument.

I ought not, perhaps, to take leave of this question of significant form without reverting to the part played by “proportion,” by which I mean the relationship of measurements taken at an angle of go° to each other. Our conception of form seems to hover round the rectangularity of spatial units. Hence are derived all such antitheses as thin and thick, tall and squat, narrow and broad, which have so distinct an emotional flavouring that I am not sure proportion ought not to be in a category by itself as a vehicle of expression.

With these considerations I shall close for the moment my analysis of the relationship between emotion and significant form. :

Before proceeding to that which would logically come next—an analysis of the relationship between “ images of things ” and “ thoughts ” in the artist’s mind and the same items as they reappear in his work—I shall turn aside to take a glance at an aspect of art which I haye hitherto disregarded, its association with rhythm.

By rhythm I mean repetitive structure. It is necessary to emphasise this because the word is indiscriminately used to describe both the nature of what is repeated, and the fact that repetitive structure exists. In the former sense it is practically equivalent to the “ suggested movement ” element of significant form. I therefore propose to narrow its meaning down to the latter sense, for the sake of clearness.

Thus, in my vocabulary, the rippled surface of the sea or the hum of a threshing-machine is “ rhythmic,” because both consist of a repetition of similar units. But neither is “ significant,” since neither contains a rendering of mental events. An individual may render them significant relative to himself by reading into their “pure form” a resemblance to something going on in his own mind, but in that case he has begun to suffer from symptoms of inspiration, and the fault, if one may So put it, is not with the sea or the machine. In our sense it can only be the resulting pictures or poems which are “ significant.” :

Now the problem with which we are faced is this: Why is rhythm in our sense omnipresent in art ? The answer which I suggest is that the creative mind employs rhythm to produce in itself a state in which the aesthetic faculty can function freely, that, in a word, every bout of zxsthetic activity must be accompanied by a sort 0 self-hypnotism.

It is, of course, now regarded as axiomatic that intellectual functioning involves the suppression of certain primitive mental processes. If we wish these processes to regain their activity we have to lull the intellect into quiescence.

Thus, for example, by hypnotism we resuscitate the complete suggestibility of the herd-animal (some authorities, naively, as I feel, assert that what we resuscitate is an infantile attitude of suggestibility towards the parent). Or, again by hypnotism, we can resuscitate repetitive memory, which reels off past experience with mechanical precision, and is regarded as the prototype of “ synthetic ” memory. ‘Thus there would seem to be some ground, on argument by analogy, for the supposition that aesthetic activity and intellectual activity are mutually exclusive. That they are at any rate independent is more easily demonstrable by means of the observed phenomena of insanity, for it has been found that a certain degree of impaired intellect exercises no deleterious effect on the creative and executant aesthetic faculties. An interesting point is that as the breakdown of mental organisation proceeds the aesthetic faculties vanish in a fixed order. First prose becomes impossible, then verse, then painting or drawing, then sculpture, and finally music. This demonstrates that those arts depend least upon intellect which depend most upon significant form.

Granting then, to resume our argument, that some parallel may fairly be drawn between the phenomena of hypnotism and the phenomena of aesthetic activity, let us see how this assumption helps us towards understanding the function of rhythm.

In the first place, we may note the effect of any impressions which happen to possess rhythmic qualities. For example, when we look long at the sea or listen long to a threshing-machine, we become curiously drowsy, just as we do when swung in a hammock or massaged rhythmically. ‘This, of course, is not the same thing as going off into a hypnotic trance, but since almost all rhythmic stimuli are found to be an aid to hypnotism, we may assume that this drowsiness and the hypnotic trance are closely related.

Accordingly, one conclusion which I wish to state at this point is that the repetitive structure of art represents some mechanism working in the mind of the artist as a sedative of intellect.

The musician repeats over and over to himself the phrase he finds obsessing his mind. The artist imposes first upon one part of his subject and then upon another his obsessive configurations of form and colour. The poet reiterates his obsessive cadences. I envisage the process as a sort of circular system involving the mutual reinforcement of the agencies at work, obsession leading to repetition, and repetition stimulating the forces which lead to obsession. When we come to the question of aesthetic pleasure we shall return to our analysis of the mental modifications produced by rhythm.

Logical sequence demands that we should deal next with the relationship between ‘‘images of things” and “thoughts” in the artist’s mind, and the same items as they reappear in his work.

Now here the difficulties which confront us are quite different. When we considered the relationship between emotion and significant form, and suggested that it was one of resemblance, the difficulty seemed to be that we were seeking to compare two utterly heterogeneous entities. :

Cognitive consciousness and the outside world seem on the contrary to have a vast amount in common. It is as though the relationship between mind and matter were that of a plastic material pressed against a hard mould. Cognition bears the imprint of objective reality. Between a mental image of a tree and a painted tree in a picture we feel no gulf, nor again between a thought in the mind and the same thought uttered or written. Accordingly, these elements of art present no problem of expression such as is presented by emotion and abstract form. Imposing upon the aesthetician no obvious necessity for hard thought, these elements have, until a quite recent date, furnished him with the material for much elegant discourse. It may then be questioned why I propose to expend a certain amount of space on an aspect of art which after centuries of desultory discussion now tends to be dismissed as wholly negligible.

The answer is this. Just at the moment, when this particular region of aesthetics appeared to be on the point of utter desolation, it has been resown with a crop of promising problems. I refer to the speculations of Freud. According to Freud, the artist is in essence a dreamer who has the gift of creating material productions by means of which he shares his dreams with others. In the nineteenth century such a statement would have passed as an agreeable platitude. To-day it involves us in formidable difficulties. In particular, it implies two tenets which we must examine with some care.

In the first place, there is the question of symbolism. To begin with, we must decide what we are to denote by the word. In its widest sense it seems to me legitimate to call any material entity which can conceivably be relied upon to evoke any particular mental event the “ symbol of that event. But for the purposes of this essay, I propose to narrow down the meaning of the word to the particular case of what we may call “ disguised ” symbols, round which this controversy centres.

Freud maintains that dreams are a sort of reversal of the current of consciousness. Instead of seeing certain things which cause you to have certain feelings, as occurs in waking consciousness, you have feelings which cause you to see things. ‘The feelings in question are attributed y him to the efforts of thwarted instincts to find an outlet during the temporary abeyance of “ inhibition ”— the tyranny, that is to say, of newly acquired, civilised motivations.

The things which one sees are objects connected in various ways with the particular instinct concerned, and Freud’s belief is that these objects, suspected as they are by “the Censor ” of complicity in unsanctioned mental movements, are under the necessity of adopting a disguise when they appear in consciousness. Our old security in supposing that things in pictures and events in literature are neither more nor less than what they superficially appear to be (putting aside all question of abstract form), thus crumbles at a touch. We move, as at a bal masqué, among figures that may at any moment have an utterly unexpected identity fastened upon them. Already, following on Freud’s Leonardo da Vinci, a new school of art-criticism is springing up which seeks to correlate the content of the artist’s work with his “ complexes.” In a matter so little susceptible of experimental demonstration all argument seems futile. According to temperament, one is either irritated or interested by this type of speculation. ‘Those aestheticians who had hoped to keep attention centred upon abstract form naturally both resent and deride a line of thought which resuscitates interest in subject-matter. The same persons also bitterly resent the second suggestion implicit in Freud’s dreamtheory, the suggestion that art is a form of wish-fulfilment. I must admit that Freud himself in his Psychopathology of Everyday Life seems to go out of his way to expose hims to criticism. The artist, he says, wishes for, and lacks, love, power, and riches. He obtains hallucinatory fulfilment of these wishes in day-dreams, which he transmutes into a concrete, communicable form, and thereby gets some, at any rate, of the things he started out by wanting. In further pees of wish-fulfilment as the essence of art he adds a reproduction of an aesthetically negligible picture representing a prisoner dreaming that an elf is sawing asunder his prison bars. In the circumstances, it really seems to be his own fault if he is pilloried as an advocate of that sort of art which appeals to lust, snobbery, and silly optimism rather than to aesthetic sensitivity—the Academy nude, for example, the magazine-cover and the below-stairs feuilleton with a happy ending. Now so long as wish-fulfilment is interpreted in the sense in which Freud himself appears to interpret it in this particular passage, these criticisms are perfectly valid. The sort of “wishes” which he here enumerates correspond with our English use of the word in that they are directions of conscious effort, easy to define and describe.

But a wider study of Freud’s work shows that the meaning which he generally attaches to the same German word considerably transcends in scope our English “ wish.” It really covers the whole field of life’s dynamic aspect. According to my hypothesis art is indeed wish-fulfilment, using the word in the wide sense indicated, and that in two distinct ways.

In the first place, I regard the emotion-significant form equation as involving a sort of wishor (if one does not mind the word) motivation-fulfilment. We have assumed, it will be remembered, that the patterning of emotion is principally determined by the blend of motivations active at the moment. We have also assumed that the translation of this patterning into material form acts in some way as a sort of substitutive outlet for the motivation. Abstract form in art may therefore be regarded as a fulfilment of “ wishes,” which thus find an outlet in an earlier stage of their development than seems to be contemplated either by Freud or his opponents.

In the second place, I regard my hypothesis that the content of art is subjectively arranged as equivalent to admitting the question of wish-fulfilment into the discussion, since by “subjective”? I mean “ patterned according to the proclivities of the individual ” as opposed to “patterned according to the structure of external reality.” This part of my hypothesis might seem so self-evident that we must pause to consider why the idea of wish-fulfilment in art has met with such formidable opposition. One reason I have already suggested, that this diversion of thought from the problem of significant form is deprecated. A second which I suspect, is that the phrase wish-fulfilment seems to suggest an element of the haphazard. Very rightly the aesthetician insists that there is no such element in art, and, calling to mind that science also excludes it, he rather rashly groups together artists and scientists in antithesis to the plain man.

The fallacy of this line of thought seems to me to be the assumption that logic is the sole possible principle by means of which chaos can be avoided. In my view, art avoids chaos because it consists in co-ordinating form with certain mental processes which are in themselves essentially systematic—as what vital structure is not? But the term logical in its literal sense does not refer to structure of this kind. It refers to a particular aspect of a particular sort of mental process. We can only extend it beyond that use by a picturesque but “ logically ” (I use the word with intention) worthless metaphor.

The artist and scientist, as distinct from the ordinary mortal, have indeed this in common, that they both aim at a unified and purified type of mental process. They differ from one another in this, that each attains his unity by excluding as far as possible that which is most essential to the other.

The next point with which I must deal is, therefore, the degree to which the artist finds this exclusion impossible. For it is quite clear that, apart perhaps from music, all art does owe a certain limited allegiance to objective reality.

I remember in my earlier days of aesthetic curiosity being shown pictures of very crooked coffee-pots, and being told that I must not mind them being crooked, because they were bits of “ pure form” and not mere culinary utensils.

It puzzled me then to know why “ purity ” of form should distort objects, and how I could possibly help feeling discomforted by distortion of this kind. And, if I felt discomforted, what was to become of aesthetic pleasure ?

I feel now that I can formulate some vague ideas as to the incompatibility between literal representation and an arrangement of form suggestive of expressive movement. But my feeling that an awareness of too obvious infringements against objective truth prevents aesthetic pleasure still remains. In fact, I feel inclined to amplify it along the lines of my main theory. It occurs to me as probable that an awareness of distortion destroys aesthetic pleasure by arousing intellectual activity. To detect such distortion at all is a semi-intellectual process, and tends inevitably to be followed by such wholly intellectual questions as, “ What exactly is wrong?” From this point of view we begin to realise how the plastic artist’s interest in grasping the structurally essential features of the form he represents differs from the scientist’s interest in objective realities. The artist has to grasp these features only because he needs to make his draughtsmanship convincing, without tying himself down to the literal lines of his subject at too many points. A grasp of the essential, as distinct from the incidental, qualities of the form he is dealing with enables him to do this, to produce, in fact, the maximum impression, with the minimum real presence, of objective truth.

Before taking leave of my comparison between art and science I should like to touch on its historical aspect. Art is unable to consolidate any progress (outside the sphere of pure technique) which it may from time to time make. Accordingly its history shows us a precariously balanced performance wobbling between non-significant copying and mere chaos up and down the same length of rope. Science, on the other hand, progresses in a steady straight line away from subjectivity. We used, for example, to believe that the human body and soul were unique simply because our egotism made us wish them to be. Darwin and Freud compel us to recognise an irksome relationship to the animal world which we had tried to disavow.

We now come to the problem of aesthetic pleasure. It is a very difficult one, which has repeatedly baffled research. At any rate we have the advantage of approaching it with some semblance of proper preparation, a glance, that is to say, at the processes which precede it. This very obvious precaution is one which the nineteenth century, following Fechner, conspicuously omitted to make. For this sin of our fathers we still suffer, since we find foisted upon us a pseudo-science of experimental zesthetics.

It may come as a shock to my readers to learn that psychological laboratories quite recently existed — may still exist for all I know — where anyone who could be induced to waste a sufficient amount of time was confronted with cards displaying simple geometrical figures or single colours, and asked which he liked best, and why ; and that it was believed that statistics compiled from this sort of test might throw some light on the fundamental problems of aesthetic pleasure.

I quite realise that these psychologists use the word “ aesthetic ” in a wider sense than Ihave done. For them it includes, in effect, the whole pleasure-displeasure aspect of sensory impression. ‘This latitude of terminology has, however, an unfortunate effect upon. their researches into the problem now before us. They come blundering into the sequence of art-experience at its final stage, without looking back, and distracted by a host of irrelevant considerations. For example, taste, smell, and touch immediately claim inclusion. One would have thought that the fact of expressive arts having risen up around hearing and sight, and not around the other senses, would have aroused them to some suspicion as to the value of their methods. The very contrary event took place. They sought to investigate the basis of agreeable form by the same sort of technique as might be used for investigating the preferences of the palate or nostril. They seem to disregard the fact that the more rudimentary senses give what one may call “emphatic positive or negative answers” to questions of preference, both because they are less discriminating and because they are more closely linked with vital instinct than hearing or sight. Thus sweet tastes evoke a “ positive ” answer because the human palate has not yet adjusted itself to the world - abundance of sugar, and there is a certain peremptoriness about this answer because the palate and the nutritive instincts are closely associated. Sounds and sights are normally only reacted to after intellectual deliberation. But there are various exceptions to this rule, of which reaction to art is one. (Blinking when dazzled is another.) Between these exceptions and full ratiocination lie all sorts of visual and auditory reaction which for one reason or another evade clear intellectual analysis. Somewhere in this limbo 1 should place reaction to test-cards. Almost all these reactions find themselves confused with each other, and with those reactions, which are simply sign-posts for nutrition or sex, in the “ aesthetic” reaction of the oldfashioned psychological laboratory. In these circumstances there is nothing surprising about their failure to make much headway. Warned by their failure let us proceed prudently.

There are two directions in which I propose to push the process of exploration. ‘Two main ideas have dominated this essay, expression and subjectivity, and I believe that in each lies an element of aesthetic pleasure. Tolstoy, with his eye ever open for spiritual expedients, saw in art, as a form of expression, a method of communion between individuals, a link binding men together. This teleological view of art is somewhat outside my scope, but one supposition which my hypothesis clearly involves is that a function which is directly descended from the expressive sounds and gestures of the animal world may in many cases subserve the ends of herdinstinct.

To a certain extent I think that it is probably true that the artist aims at communicating his emotions to others and saving himself from solitude. But it also seems probable that the mere making of a work of art acts as an outlet for the motivation which it expresses, and to this extent aesthetic pleasure must be the sensation of relief brought to the organism by the successful functioning of a safety-valve.

Another criticism upon the communication theory of aesthetic pleasure is that the amount of gratification received seems curiously independent of the content of the communication made. Thus a picture of death and pillage gives as much pleasure, other things being equal, as a picture of a tea-party. Yet unesthetic communications, as newspaper reports, for example, depress or elate us in accordance with their content — we are pleased to hear of happiness and harassed by atrocities.

This curious phenomenon of pleasurable feeling devoid of any obvious utilitarian aspect suggests to me a set of parallel instances not generally recognised as relevant to the problem of aesthetic pleasure.

Thus there is a stage in being half-hanged, half-drowned, or half-stunned, which is reported to be pleasurable. Ishould perhaps not have credited these reports had I not experienced the last variety myself. There is a pleasurable stage in the early instants of an epileptic fit, vividly described by Dostoievsky. From Dostoievsky’s description of the sudden sense of cosmic order and unity which characterises this experience it is but a short step to the Nirvana of religious self-hypnotism by concentration of thought, or the giddy exultation of the dancing Dervish. Nor again can the relevance of the pleasure-component in intoxication by alcohol and other drugs be wholly disregarded, although in these instances the direct stimulation of vital organs rather complicates the question.

I think that the conception, which I have tried to keep in prominence throughout this essay, of intellect acting as the organ of contact with objective reality, gives us the means of grouping all these phenomena together as evasions of contact with objectivity by diminution of intellectual functioning. It is a biological fact that when the efficiency of an organism wanes the first functions to fail are those which have been most recently acquired.

The phenomena which I have enumerated are all, in different ways, attacks upon vital efficiency. ‘Therefore the first result in each case is a drop in intellectual activity. I suggest that for the average human being contact with the objective world is a source of more pain than pleasure, and that the pleasure-component in this group of experiences represents relief due to the lessening of this contact. The essence of such trances seems to me to be this: that they enable a man to forget his past and his probable future, and the famine in China and the life in London, and the last war and the next war, and live for a moment like an infusorial organism with consciousness narrowed down to the pin-point of the present instant and the single self, freed temporarily from the fetters of objective oppression. ‘The unity which the ecstatic mystic reads into the universe is, I maintain, merely a projection of the unity restored to his own mind by a temporary truce between the conflicting elements therein—fundamental subjective functioning and superimposed objective adaptation to environment ; the terms of the truce being a temporary abandonment of activity by the faculties which pass on, as it were, the pressure of the outer world.

The analogy of the happy lunatic who lives in a fool’s paradise of pure subjectivity occurs to the mind, but here I think we are in danger of doing an injustice to the mystic. May not he, looking inwards, see much that others, looking outwards, fail to note? Have men been utterly mistaken in seeking philosophic guidance from the poets ? We may, perhaps, justify their expectation somehow thus. Many thinkers have regarded terrestrial progress as the resultant of two factors—Mind, a force which keeps shifting the direction of its ever-increasing pressure; and Matter, a dead mass against which this living force thrusts. May not the poet, in his subjective trance, by increased awareness of his own mental processes foresee the first symptoms of Mind’s next move, just as increased subjective physical sensitivity in sleep sometimes produces dreams of sore throats and so forth, which actually materialise some days later ?

Thus the great religious teachers of two thousand years ago felt a sympathetic and imaginative compunction towards the sufferings of all living things, which may quite possibly become a common mental characteristic of the whole human race two thousand years hence. 

I must now pass to a point whose discussion has hitherto been crowded out, the reason why rhythmic impressions exercise a peculiar effect upon consciousness. We have already noticed in some detail the hypnotic effect of such impressions, and we have had occasion to mention the fact that similar results can be obtained by fastening attention down to a single point, as in Buddhist meditation, rather than stimulating it repetitively. That the intellect can be affected by a bang on the head or a dose of some drug seems to us natural enough, but its sensitivity to anything so intangible as mere repetition or immobilisation of impressions appears somehow paradoxical. May not the explanation be something of this kind—that irregular movement is the natural gait of intellectual functioning, and that it is unable-either to progress with measured regularity or to stay still. If you compel it to do either of these things it simply breaks down. Mere matter, on the other hand, has of course immobility, of a sort, as its natural state, and when this immobility is disturbed the next most natural state seems to be one of rhythmical movement.

Thus all simple disturbances of equilibrium result in rhythm, as when a pendulum receives a single push or a tree sways in a steady wind. ‘This rule the movement of heart and lungs, and perhaps all vital processes except intellect, follow.

Irregular movement can only be accounted for by the intervention of some complicating factor, as when a kitten plays with the pendulum, or an eddy of conflicting air-currents blows a leaf from the tree hither and thither. Some complicating factor of this kind seems to be involved in the workings of the intellect. ‘The least rhythmical of all conversations are those in which a complicated idea is being intelligently discussed. Conversely it is amusing, when one is being anathematised by excitable persons, to note how their stream of vociferation slips more and more into a regular rhythm as their words recede farther and farther from logical sense.

There is another point with which I must attempt to deal now that I have set my hand to tidying up the frayed ends projecting from the fabric of what has gone before. I feel that I have been unjust to the experimental aestheticians. However hasty their postulates may seem, one must face the fact that on some points there has been a curious uniformity in their results. Almost all their subjects prefer lines to be divided at or near the proportion 1: 1-618. They all prefer triangles which do not look as if they were toppling over, and curves which stick to some system. How are we to account for all this? I suggest that we can do so without assuming that the mind of the normal man quits during these experiments its usual groove of practical reaction to environment. The proportions near “ the golden mean” are suggested to him by his very practical propensity towards compromise—he won’t divide the line either very equally or very unequally. He doesn’t like the triangle to look unstable because things which actually tumble down, and falls experienced by oneself, are generally a nuisance. He likes curves to be systematic because system is always a useful principle, even in business. It seems to me quite possible that all laboratory observations of this sort have only the remotest bearing on the passive aesthetic experience of sensitivity to art. That there may be some fixed canons of Beauty—if we choose to employ the word —I do not deny. Nor could it well be otherwise, since certain factors in certain arts enjoy a certain degree of fixity. The painter has to concentrate visual attention within a finite space, and avoid lines leading the eye ouside his frame.

The musician has to avoid simultaneous sound impressions which would confuse the perceptive faculty of hearing. But to try to take an aesthetic short-cut by assuming that the nose, palate, and touch have inscrutable preferences of their own, and then modelling on this analogy such phrases as “ pleasing to the eye,” “ pleasing to the ear,” seems to me simply a sort of colloquial personification of the senses quite devoid of scientific support.

Unless we are utterly to revise our psychological axioms we must assume that the senses merely mediate an impression, of which some larger totality behind them feels either approval or disapproval. It has been with the workings of this larger totality that I have tried to concern myself in this essay.

I may perhaps be pardoned if, before I end, I attempt to anticipate certain lines of opposition which I foresee that I am bound to arouse. ‘here are certain persons who like art, but believe themselves to hate emotion, and therefore desire a theory of art excluding all mention of it. I suspect such people of confusing “ emotion,” a normal attribute of the mind, with “ emotionality,” the abnormal inflammation of this attribute. They have my hearty concurrence in deploring this latter state. But need they go yet farther, deny any sort of emotion any place in art, and even assert, contrary to the whole trend of such evidence as we possess, that art ought to be “ intellectual ” ?

Again, there are certain other persons who like art and hate abstract thought. ‘To them my theories will seem far-fetched. They will tend to endorse such views as those of a critic who stated recently that for him art was nothing but “ the characteristic use of medium.”

Having myself made numerous efforts to produce works of art, I have hardly had the opportunity to overlook the influence of medium on form, even if I have failed hitherto to make any reference to this factor, since no explanation seemed to be needed of its place in my hypothesis. Nor again do I quarrel with their aspiration towards keeping their feet on firm ground. But the accomplishment of their aspiration seems to me to be too dearly purchased, when they thereby sacrifice their outlook over all but a limited corner of the aesthetic problem.