THE STRUCTURE OF WUTHERING HEIGHTS’

By common consent Wuthering Heights is a remarkable book. I do not propose to discuss its literary merits, but to confine myself to the humbler task of investigating its structure, which presents certain peculiarities. Whether this is worth doing I do not know, but I found that it added to my interest in the book and made the tale much more vivid for me.

The main theme is how a sort of human cuckoo, called Heathcliff, sets out with success to acquire all the property of two families, the Earnshaws and the Lintons. The tale is a fairly complicated one, and the incidents extend over a period of more than thirty years. Stated as baldly and shortly as I can, the plot is as follows: Mr and Mrs Earnshaw live at Wuthering Heights, a farm-house on a Yorkshire moor. They have two children, a son called Hindley and a daughter Catherine. One day Mr Earnshaw, who has been to Liverpool on business, brings home a waif he has picked up there. This waif, Heathcliff, is brought up at Wuthering Heights. Not long after, Mrs Earnshaw dies. Heathcliff is Mr Earnshaw’s favourite; he is also great friends with Catherine, but Hindley, who is older, bullies him, At last, Hindley is sent off to college. When Mr Earnshaw dies, Hindley returns for the funeral, bringing with him a young wife. He takes possession, ill-treats Heathcliff, thrusts him into the position of a mere servant, and allows him no more education. But Catherine and Heathcliff have remained great friends, and one Sunday they go for a walk, and out of curiosity look at Thrushcross Grange, a gentleman’s house in a park four miles off where Mr and Mrs Linton live. Catherine and Heathcliff peep in through the drawing-room window and see the two Linton children—Edgar and Isabella. The Lintons, hearing Heathcliff and Catherine and taking them for robbers, let the bulldog loose on them; the dog seizes Catherine and hurts her ankle badly. She is taken in and looked after at Thrushcross Grange for five weeks, and returns to Wuthering Heights elegantly dressed. Heathcliff, who is very dirty and untidy, is ashamed. The next day the two Lintons come to dinner; Heathcliff behaves ill and is punished by Hindley. The next year Hindley’s wife gives birth to a son—Hareton. She, however, is consumptive and does not survive long. In despair at her death Hindley takes to drink. When Catherine is fifteen Edgar Linton proposes to her. She accepts him, feeling all the time that she is doing wrong because she loves Heathcliff. She tells Hareton’s nurse, Ellen Dean, about it; Heathcliff overhears part of the conversation, runs off and vanishes. Catherine is distracted by this, gets fever, and when convalescent goes to stay at Thrushcross Grange. Her host and hostess, and Mrs Linton, both catch the fever and die. This may be considered the end of the first stage of the story. The elder generation are all dead. The next generation are all alive — Hindley and Catherine at Wuthering Heights, Edgar and Isabella at Thrushcross Grange. Hindley’s wife is dead, but his son Hareton — the only representative of the third generation — is alive. Heathcliff has disappeared. His passion for Catherine and his revenge is the main theme of the root of the story. 

Catherine in due course marries Edgar and goes to live at Thrushcross Grange. After six months of happiness, Heathcliff, who has meanwhile mysteriously got some education and money, reappears. He sets himself to ruin Hindley, who gambles and drinks. He also finds that Isabella is in love with him, and decides to marry her to get her money. One day, after a violent scene between Heathcliff and Edgar, Catherine goes on hunger strike and gets brain fever. Isabella elopes with Heathcliff, who treats her abominably, and finally brings her back to Wuthering Heights. One Sunday while Edgar is at church, Heathcliff comes to see Catherine. ‘There is a passionate scene. That night Catherine gives birth to a daughter and dies. On the night after the funeral, Hindley tries to kill Heathcliff but is nearly killed by him. Isabella escapes from Wuthering Heights and goes to the South of England, where she gives birth to a sickly child named Linton Heathcliff. Soon after this Hindley dies of drink, and Heathcliff is left in possession of Wuthering Heights with Hareton, whom, out of revenge for the way he was treated as a boy, he brings up as a mere brute. At this stage there is a long gap in the story. Edgar’s daughter, who is also called Catherine, lives with him at Thrushcross Grange; Isabella’s son, Linton, lives in the South of England with her. Catherine is kept in ignorance of both her cousins Linton and Hareton.

Edgar hears that Isabella is dying and goes to see her, Catherine in his absence goes to Penistone Crags, and in doing so has to pass Wuthering Heights, where she sees Hareton. On Isabella’s death, Edgar comes home with Linton, but Heathcliff claims him, and he is taken to Wuthering Heights. Catherine is not allowed by Edgar, her father, to go there. One day, after some time, Catherine on a walk meets Heathcliff and Hareton and goes to Wuthering Heights, where she sees her cousin, Linton. Catherine and Linton correspond secretly. The correspondence is detected and stopped. Catherine’s father, Edgar, becomes ill. Heathcliff meets Catherine and tells her that Linton is seriously ill. She goes to see him, and many times visits him secretly. One day, just before her father dies, she is kidnapped by Heathcliff and forced to marry Linton. Soon after Linton dies, having made a will leaving all his personal property to his father, Heathcliff. Heathcliff takes possession of Thrushcross Grange, and lets it to Mr Lockwood, who tells the story. But Heathcliff dies soon after, and Hareton and Catherine marry.

How is a long story like this to be told? How is the reader’s interest to be excited? How is the tale to be kept together? How are we to be made to feel the lapse of time without being pestered by dates? How far did the authoress accurately visualise the ages of the characters in the different incidents, the topography, and so on? And how did Heathcliff succeed in getting the property? These are the questions I attempt to answer.

The most obvious thing about the structure of the story which deals with three generations is the symmetry of the pedigree. Mr and Mrs Earnshaw at Wuthering Heights and Mr and Mrs Linton at Thrushcross Grange each have one son and one daughter. Mr Linton’s son marries Mr Earnshaw’s daughter, and their only child Catherine marries successively her two cousins—Mr Linton’s grandson and Mr Earnshaw’s grandson, See the following pedigree :—

In actual life I have never come across a pedigree of such absolute symmetry. I shall have to refer to this pedigree again later. It is a remarkable piece of symmetry in a tempestuous book.

The method adopted to arouse the reader’s interest and to give vividness and reality to the tale is one which hag been used with great success by Joseph Conrad, But it requires great skill.

After Edgar Linton’s death, Mr Lockwood, the Nnarrator, takes ‘Thrushcross Grange for a year. He goes to call on his landlord, Heathcliff, at Wuthering Heights, and is puzzled to find there a farouche young woman and an awkward boor. At first he supposes Catherine to be Heathcliff’s wife; when told she is his daughter-in-law, he then supposes that Hareton is Heathcliff’s son, and has again to be corrected. He, and the reader, are naturally puzzled at this strange trio. Lockwood calls again, and is forced to spend the night because of a heavy fall of snow. In his room he finds some books with the name Catherine Earnshaw and Catherine Linton, and a sort of diary of Catherine’s in a childish hand which gives a vivid , picture of the situation just after her father’s death. i Mr Lockwood has a nightmare in which Catherine’s spirit comes to the window, and he also witnesses a strange scene of Heathcliff imploring Catherine’s spirit. Our interest cannot fail now to be excited. What is this strange man and this strange menage? Who was this Catherine who died years before? What were her relations with Heathcliff? Naturally, Lockwood is much intrigued. On his way back next day he catches a chill and becomes ill. To pass the time he asks Ellen Dean, the housekeeper at Thrushcross Grange, what she knows about the family at Wuthering Heights. She, who was first Hareton’s nurse and then the younger Catherine’s, tells him the story of the past thirty years in considerable detail. So that during the major part of the book Mr Lockwood is telling us what Ellen Dean told him, but sometimes, also, what Ellen Dean told him that someone else — for instance, Isabella — had told her. Only a small part, perhaps one-tenth of the book, consists of direct narrative by Lockwood from his own knowledge. But such a scheme may be confusing, and it is easy to muddle the time. Did Emily Brontë realise and let us know the dates when each event happened? She did, but not by giving them directly. Look again at the pedigree. The dates there have all been derived from the book, yet only one is directly stated. What first brought me to study the book more closely was when I noticed that the first word in the book was a date—1801. I thought this must have some significance. Similarly, the first word of Chapter XXXII is 1802. Apart from this, only one other date is given directly. In the last sentence of Chapter VII, Ellen Dean says, “I will be content to pass on to the next summer—the summer of 1778, that is, nearly twenty-three years ago.” This gives no further information, as 1801 is twenty-three years after 1778, but in the first sentence of the next chapter she tells us that Hareton was born in June. ‘This is how I get June 1778 for Hareton’s birth in the pedigree. But what about the rest of the dates, not only those in the pedigree but of all the incidents in the story? There are a considerable number (perhaps nearly a hundred) indications of various kinds to help us—intervals of time, ages of characters, the months, the harvest moon, the last grouse, and so forth, and we learn, incidentally, that the younger Catherine’s birthday was on 2oth March. Sometimes, too, we know the day of the week — thus Ellen Dean will remember something which happened on a Sunday, or on a Christmas Eve. Taking all these indications, it is, I think, possible to ascertain the year, and, in most cases, the month of the year in which every event takes place—also the ages of the various characters, except, naturally, there is a slight doubt as to Heathcliff, because no one knows his exact age when he was found by Mr Earnshaw. But one has to 80 warily and consider all the indications together, for there is a curious subtlety that sometimes the characters are described as looking some ages which are not exact. Thus Lockwood when he first describes them says that Heathcliff was about forty and Catherine did not look seventeen. In fact, Catherine was seventeen and three-quarters and Heathcliff cannot have been more than thirty-eight. It would be too tedious to state the process by which I have discovered each date (see Appendix). But I will give one or two illustrations. We already know that Hareton was born in June 1778; we are told that he was nearly five when Catherine Earnshaw married Edgar Linton, so that the marriage was before June 1783. But Heathcliff returned in September after they had been happily married for six months. Thus the marriage was in April 783. We are told that the scene that led to Catherine’s death was a Sunday in the March after Heathcliff’s return, and that her daughter, Catherine, was born about midnight, and the mother died two hours after. Later on we learn that Catherine’s birthday was the 20th (and that this was also treated as the day of her mother’s death). Hence Catherine died at 2 a.m. on Monday, 20th March 1784. 

I will give only one other instance. Lockwood begins his account in 1801; it is snowy weather, which might be in January or February or in November or December. But he returns in 1802 before his year’s tenancy is out. Hence the story begins at the end of 1801. A Michaelmas tenancy begins on the 10th October — not on 29th September — because when the calendar was reformed eleven days were left out. Therefore, the story begins after 10th October 1801. Now after Lockwood has been ill three weeks Heathcliff sends him some grouse, the last of the season. Since the Game Act, 1831, grouse may not be shot after 10th December, so we may take this as about the date for the last grouse. Thus the story begins about the middle of November, and this fits pretty well with the later indications. ‘That is sufficient to illustrate the process. Sometimes it is only by fitting together several indications, each rather vague, that one can find the month. There is, however, one curious fact. We can ascertain Hindley’s age. Now Ellen Dean was of the same age. She was his foster sister, and the doctor also refers to her as being of the same age as Hindley. Yet she makes two mistakes about her own age. Middle-aged people do, of course, make mistakes about their age, and these slips may have been intentional on the part of Emily Brontë, but, if so, it seems to me a little over-subtle.

The topography is equally precise. On going from Thrushcross Grange to the village of Gimmerton a high-way branches off to the moor on the left. There is a stone pillar there. ‘Thrushcross Grange lies to the south-west, Gimmerton to the east, and Wuthering Heights to the north. The distance from Thrushcrogg Grange to Wuthering Heights is four miles, and Penistone Crags lie a mile and a half farther on. It was half an hour from Gimmerton to Thrushcross Grange.

The botany is sure to be correct. Emily Brontë loved the country. I was a little surprised to find an ash tree in bud as early as 20th March, but then I realised that it was not on the moor but in the park at Thrushcross Grange, which lay low and was no doubt sheltered.

I now come to the final problem. Heathcliff schemed to get all the property of both the Earnshaws and the Lintons. How did he do it? Emily Brontë clearly had a considerable knowledge of the law. We know the source of George Eliot’s use of a base fee for the plot of Felix Holt. We do not know the source of Jane Austen’s unerring grasp of the law of real property; but she lived among people who had settled estates and could easily have obtained it. But how Emily Brontë acquired her knowledge I cannot guess. ‘There is also this difficulty. Wuthering Heights was written in the eighteen-forties. It was published in 1847. But the period of the tale is from 1771 to 1803. The Inheritance Act of 1834, the Wills Act of 1837, and, I think, the Game Act of 1831, had changed the law. Did Emily Brontë apply the law at the time she wrote or that at the period of the tale? In one case, as we shall see, she used the earlier law.

Novelists sometimes make their plots depend on the law and use legal terms. But they frequently make mistakes and sometimes are absurd as ‘Trollope is in Orley Farm. What is remarkable about Wuthering Heights is that the ten or twelve legal references are, I think, sufficient to enable us to ascertain the various legal processes by which Heathcliff obtained the property. It is not a simple matter. ‘There was a fundamental difference between the law of land (real property) and that of money and goods (personal property).

Let us begin with Wuthering Heights. The Earnshaws were farmers and not likely to have their estate settled. ‘The property had been in their family since 1500. We may take it then that Mr Earnshaw was owner in fee-simple, that is in effect absolute owner, of Wuthering Heights, and was not likely to have possessed any investments. It is more likely that there was a mortgage on the house and farm. On Mr Earnshaw’s death the land descended to Hindley as his heir-at-law. ‘There is no mention of a will. The personal property, which, probably, was only the farming stock and the furniture, would go equally to his children, Hindley and Catherine, subject to the payment of his debts out of it. On Catherine’s marriage Edgar would have become entitled to her personal property. Now Hindley drinks and gambles away all he has, and at his death the property is mortgaged up to the hilt. Heathcliff we find is the mortgagee. The personal property would also be liable to the debts. So that Heathcliff is mortgagee in possession and, for practical purposes, owner of all the Earnshaw property except any personalty that had gone to Catherine. This is all fairly simple; but it is more difficult when we come to the Linton property, ‘They were landed gentry ; they had a park, they had tenants. Mr Linton, and Edgar after him, was a magistrate. Such people, generally, had a settlement of their land, and we find, in fact, that Mr Linton had settled it by his will. To understand what happens it is necessary to go into the intricacies of real property law and to look at the pedigree,

I must explain very shortly the law of entails, What is called an estate tail is an estate which descends according to the following rules: (1) Males are preferred to females; (2) males take in order according to seniority of birth, but females take equally; (3) descendants represent their ancestor. In case of a conflict between them, rule (3) prevails. A tenant in tail of full age in possession could by means of a fictitious action (for which a deed was substituted by the Fines and Recoveries Act, 1833) bar the entail and obtain the fee-simple, which practically amounts to absolute ownership. By his will a testator could settle his land on living persons for life, but could not give life estates to the children of such persons who were not alive at the testator’s death. Consequently, if he wanted to tie up his estate as long as possible, he gave life estates to such of his descendants as were living at his death, followed by estates tail to their children.

Now the settlement made by Mr Linton’s will must have been as follows: The estate was devised to Edgar, his only son, for life, then to Edgar’s sonsin tail; Edgar’s daughters were passed over in favour of Mr Linton’s daughter, Isabella, who, presumably, had a life interest with  remainder to her sons in tail. ‘This is the usual form. Thus on Edgar Linton’s death, Linton Heathcliff became tenant in tail in possession during the few weeks he survived his uncle. As a minor he could not bar the entail. It is most improbable that he had an estate in fee-simple; that would have been too unusual. Isabella might have had an estate tail instead of a life interest. This is most improbable, but if she did, her son, Linton Heathcliff, would have become tenant in tail by descent, so the result is the same. Heathcliff claims the property — by what right? Ellen Dean says that he claimed and kept the Thrushcross Grange estate in his wife’s right and in his son’s also. She adds: “I suppose, legally at any rate, Catherine, destitute of cash and friends, cannot disturb his possession.” She is quite right in her suspicions. Even if Isabella had had an estate tail, or even an estate in fee-simple, Heathcliff would not have had any tight as husband to an estate for life—the estate known as an estate by courtesy—because Isabella was never in possession. And even if, which to my mind is not possible, Linton Heathcliff had had an estate in fee-simple, his father would not have been his heir before the Inheritance Act, 1833, because it was considered unnatural that an inheritance should ascend directly; and, as Ellen Dean knows and states, Linton Heathcliff as a minor could not dispose of his land by will. There is no difficulty as to the personal property. Whatever Isabella had Heathcliff got by marrying her. ‘There was no Married Women’s Property Act in these days. They eloped, so there was no question of a marriage settlement. Edgar Linton had saved out of his rents to make a provision for his daughter, Catherine. When dying he decides, in order to prevent Heathcliff getting at them, to alter his will so as to settle them on Catherine for life and then for her children. The attorney for whom he sends is, however, kept from going by Heathcliff, and Edgar dies before his will is altered, so the money passes to Catherine and then to her husband, Linton. He, though a minor, could (before the year 1838) make a will of personalty. He is induced or forced to do so, and leaves it all to Heathcliff,

Thus, at Heathcliff’s death, the position seems to be that he has acquired all the personal property of both families: he is mortgagee in possession of Wuthering Heights, and is, though wrongfully, in possession of Thrushcross Grange, which he has let to Lockwood. He thinks of making a will but does not do so. What then happens on his death? He has no relations, so that his real property will escheat, and his personal property will go to the Crown as bona vacantia. What then becomes of Hareton and Catherine who, when the tale ends, are to be happily married on New Year’s Day, 1803? At one time I thought this was the climax of the tragedy. These young people, ill-educated and incompetent, were to be left destitute. But that would be going too far. Catherine, as you will see from the pedigree, is the sole living descendant of Mr Linton. In some way or other, I need not go through the various alternatives, she must have become entitled to Thrushcross Grange, which is plainly by far the most valuable property. Heathcliff had been mortgagee in possession of Wuthering Heights for eighteen years, but this was not long enough to obtain an absolute title by adverse possession. Hareton, as Hindley’s heir, would be entitled to the equity of redemption. Now if Heathcliff, who managed well, properly accounted for his profits during the eighteen years as he could be made to do, it may well be that they were sufficient, if he was charged a proper occupation rent, to pay off the mortgage. So that Hareton would get the house and land unincumbered or, at any rate, only slightly burdened. The personal property was comparatively unimportant, and we can only hope that the Crown did not insist on its rights, if it knew of them, or that if it did insist, the happy couple could buy out the Crown’s claim out of the rent which Lockwood, as we know, paid.

There is, so far as I know, no other novel in the world which it is possible to subject to an analysis of the kind I have tried to make. This in itself makes the book very unusual. Did the authoress carry all the dates in her head, or did she work with a calendar? Was 20th March 1784, for example, on a Monday? According to my calculations it was not, it was a Saturday, but I should like to have this confirmed by some competent chronologist; for if I am right, it shows that Emily Brontë did not use a calendar, and that nothing will be gained by finding out, for instance, the date of Easter in 1803.

However dull and technical the above details may be, they do, I believe, throw a light on the character of Emily Brontë and her book. German romances can hardly have been the source of her knowledge of English law. A great critic has spoken of the passionate chastity iets of the book; but the extreme care in realising the ages of the characters at the time of each incident which is described seems to me a more unusual characteristic of a novel. It demonstrates the vividness of the author’s imagination.