THE CHARACTER OF JOHN DRYDEN

DRYDEN, considering his stature, his simplicity, and the satisfactory nature of everything he wrote, is sur prisingly elusive. Reading him, one is aware of the pre sence of a character as solid as Dr Johnson ; but look for him, and he is not there: the lines of the human figure dissolve, as you turn, into those of the literature of his age. For he never undertook a task which fashion or interest might not have offered: so much, though professing to despise it, he confessed. And while in this there is nothing peculiar, he shows a rarer symptom in his attitude towards these tasks. Many others, in their original choice of a form to work upon, have been guided more by the necessity of earning a living than by: their own unfettered taste. But those who succeed, those who make some- thing really great out of the material submitted to them, seldom do so, one would think, without acquiring in the business some affection for that which, though foreign in the first place, they have made properly their own. Dryden had none of this parental feeling, and remained all his life quite uninterested in the forms which he had so distinguished. And his critical prefaces, though ostensibly written to explain or defend his particular methods of practice, are inspired solely by his delight in the general discussion of literature.

Nor is it true, what is often asserted, that he was unfortunate in the fashions which he submitted to. He himself recognised, and complained, that the writing of comedies, which occupied so much of his middle life was unfitted to his talents: but, for all that, he made no effort to escape from this servitude, on which he was not, even financially, utterly dependent. And then the vogue for translations and adaptations, which gave him the crowning opportunities of his old age, was, for him, extraordinarily lucky, no less than the political crisis which swept him accidentally into his most brilliant triumphs. It is true that in the Preface to Juvenal and Persius he states that the ambition of his life, from which events had kept him, had been to write a British national epic; but it is possible that what he had in his mind was in fact accomplished by the original work which emerged from his rehandling of Boccaccio and Chaucer. Had he taken, as he suggested, the Black Prince’s campaigns for his subject, he would not have had so free a hand ; and the difference between his epic and Froissart could hardly have been so wholly advantageous to the former, as was that between Cymon and Iphigenia, say, and the corresponding story in the Decameron. ‘The national epic might conceivably have been more widely read ; it could hardly have been of greater value.

But all through Dryden’s work, even in those forms with which he was least at ease, a certain unity is felt, of which he himself seems to suggest the explanation. For there are innumerable passages, in his earlier as in his later writings, which hint, or even state, that his permanent object was to refine the English language. The rest is easy. His whole body of work can be exlained as the child of a deep enthusiasm, which made him attach but little importance to religion or politics, or even to many aspects of literature itself. What excluded everything else was the love of expression for ‘ts own sake. He devoted himself therefore to increasing the efficiency of his instruments.

His own confessions, then, suggest that he should be venerated as the great improver, and, further, that he should be explained as having applied himself to that work deliberately throughout his life. However, to say that a man wrote better than his fellows is not to say that he improved. Improving an instrument means enlarging its scope, not wielding it with greater dexterity, — an important distinction, if the nature of Dryden’s improvements is to be examined.

His age was professedly one of improvement. Waller and Denham had arrived and brought the “reformation of our numbers.” Verse was taking on its brightest graces ; prose discarding encumbrances and allowing an author’s mind to show its movement freely, like a naked body. And Dryden excelled in both, and was aware that a process of the kind was being carried out ; but whether by his own work he either guided or accelerated it, and whether, if he did, he worked at that deliberately, are difficult questions. For his prose is in many ways the most perfect of his time: it is sometimes praised as the most modern; but, nevertheless, it could be maintained that had he never lived, English prose, though losing one of its most splendid ornaments, would have developed subsequently exactly as it has done, for he was devoid of invention, and took gladly (so we may believe in spite of his grumbling) whatever came to hand. He excelled not so much by improving prose and verse as by using them as they then existed, up to the very limits of their powers. An adroit practician, with an amazing flair for making the best of what he has, may never notice certain limitations ; while less adaptable as well as more original minds may be so conscious of them as to feel it necessary to make experiments in order to their removal. But his brain was pre-eminently supple; and he had no new thing to say. Accordingly, he was not of those who enlarge the scope of a language or a style, and without too great extravagance one might plausibly argue that Boyle, who as a handler of words was remarkably uninspired, in the end assisted English more than Dryden. Substitute Bishop Berkeley for Boyle and the contention would be easy. For although Boyle had little appreciation of the degree to which the philosopher depends upon words, or of the delicate, caressing study which they demand, yet he tried to think on original lines, and passionately wished to make the way plain for others to follow where he had gone as an adventurer. Now, from strenuous thinking of that kind new styles might indeed be born, or old refashioned. But Dryden was the exact opposite of Boyle ; he loathed original thought —of course in others he respected it as much as any, but he loathed the effort of it in himself. As against that, however, he loved writing for its own sake, both his own and other people’s. And since writing came easily to him, his body of work is large.

Questions of influence are dubious at the best. But Dryden, whatever he may have thought of his position among them, was one of a number of English writers who were moving definitely and, what is more, consciously in a certain direction. Some of them at times complained that nothing was being done, but many professed to have a clear idea of what they wanted, and of how to get it. And the end in view was a greater intellectual freedom—not, this time, for the mind within itself, because that had been already won and made secure, but for the communication bétween minds, and for their knowledge of each other. The most literary of them, then, felt that their business was less to create ideas than to assist, as it were, their fertilisation. They quite realised that the motive power of improvement was coming from beyond them: they could at most facilitate its development a little here or there. But that little was all-important. And the recognition of it led to proposals for the founding of an authoritative literary academy, as a branch of the Royal Society.

One thinks now of academies of this kind as being necessarily either deadening or futile; but this one presented itself very differently to its enthusiastic founders. It was to be a kind of athletic training-ground, in which the members should help in divesting each other of useless conventions, like “‘ luxury and redundance of speech,” returning to a “ primitive purity and shortness,” with the modesty that should befit a “land of experimental knowledge.” In fact the only object which these academicians really set before themselves was to leave original thought as free a course as possible, by insuring that it should be able to appear in a perfectly direct and unambiguous form, while fallacies should no longer allure the innocent by decking themselves meretriciously as ““ seeming mysteries.”

They realised, then, that a change in English prose was taking place, and though some of them may have thought that it could be controlled more than such processes in practice can, yet they did not deceive themselves so far as to think that they were deliberately keeping it in motion. Just as it was impossible for them to revert to earlier habits of thought, so was it unthinkable that a man should be able to write in the style of his forebears. It was as clean against nature that a member of the Royal Society should write like Sir Thomas Browne, as that he should believe in witches — unless he were Bishop Glanville ; and even that eccentric strove against Nullibists, Holenmerians, and such, in ways that might have horrified the simplicity of King James I.

There are no two ways of saying the same thing. ‘So many thoughts in so many words,” said the cognoscenti of the Royal Society: and if one can be said to precede the other, it is thoughts which must find words to breed in. So that at a time of intellectual advancement the men who, as far as language is concerned, are forcing the pace are those whose brains are pioneering, But before newly discovered country can be opened up to ordinary traffic, roads must be constructed. So, too, in the use of language, we may compare prose to the roads which must be built ; and although the explorers (or the original thinkers) and the exploiters (or the developers of prose) may be different persons, the latter, one would think, must have, if not the talent of the pioneers, at any rate their ardour; the same impelling discontent, though different ways of acting on it.

Dryden, however, exhibits no such haste, and it again becomes clear that he loved writing entirely for its own sake — assuming, that is, that he really loved it. For, as far as invention goes, he had less to say than most. And even the second point, the eager following (as opposed to mere admiring) of creative originality in others, would scarcely be found well exemplified in him. In politics, in religion, and in literature itself, though in no sense a reactionary, he was a grand conservative. But his conservatism came not from timidity, not from laziness, not from snobbish conceit or suspicion, but rather from intense and passionate gusto, from ardent enjoyment of life as it was, from anxiety to seize and incorporate into himself all his surroundings. And if that was the thing most worth doing, the conclusion was obvious. Wherever he looked he found God’s plenty in nature and in art. To understand and to enjoy all this was more than enough to fill the capacities of a human life, whose hours were too precious to waste in any doubtful scheme of change. 

This conservative attitude especially marked his views on religion, which are very plainly expressed in The Hind and the Panther and Religio Latci (to look no farther). The latter is in some sort a companion-to Lord Halifax’s Character of a Trimmer; for from an expression of the scholar’s appreciation of the gulf that lies between absolute truth on the one hand, and, on the other, man’s most hopeful conception of it, it points out the final unimportance of what a man may believe, as compared with the practical results of holding such a faith in the actual world he lives in. Dryden shows, again, that for a limited being like man to begin to understand an infinite God is a simple impossibility. How vain, then, for men to search for God, though they reverence Him never so much, with a rational understanding, whose true object is the sufficiently intricate question of their relations with their fellow-men—

Private reason ’tis more just to curb,
Than by disputes the public peace disturb : 
For points obscure are of small use to learn, 
But common quiet is mankind’s concern.

While, therefore, the Papists with their obscurantism and claim to infallible interpretation, and the Nonconformists with their “ infallibility in the private spirit ” were equally astray, the latter, at least, were more ridiculous, because less rational—

Study and pains were now no more their care ; 
Texts were explained by fasting and by prayer.

Dryden himself, being so rational as to make no extravagant claims for the powers of his own reason, recognised how desirable infallibility would be, wherever residing, if only it could be found. But he saw as the only claimants the “ dark lantern of the spirit,” or, alternatively, what Lord Halifax described as ‘‘ good resolute nonsense backed with authority.” But since ‘ common quiet ” is the only earthly test that can be applied, the “ resolute nonsense ” may become the best of sense, if the authority which backs it is the general agreement of mankind to use it as a common standard: and though you have not, there, infallibility in its strictest meaning, yet you have something which, by providing exactly similar adyantages, may without danger be allowed the name, if it demands it.

Of course this is not quite what Dryden said in Religio Laici, but it represents a position which its author was so clearly approaching that when, soon afterwards, he embraced Rome and wrote The Hind and the Panther, whatever may be thought of his sincerity, his action was certainly not inconsistent. For it can always be referred to one continuously held position — that of the man to whom quarrelling over questions whose resolution is obviously set beyond the limits of this life would seem not only impertinent (as he would have said) but also dangerous. Men may lose irrevocably what they possess in the heat of struggling for the unattainable. For life seemed so full of things there, actually, ready to be enjoyed and capable of absorbing all the human faculties in their enjoyment, that it partook either of blind stupidity or else of ingratitude and headlong conceit for a man to dismiss the unexhausted (perhaps inexhaustible) present, in an attempt, as restless as it was vain, to accelerate and mould an already destined future.

Now if all this has any bearing upon his work, the point of it must be, that in a long and productive life, lived very closely in the world, Dryden never changed or advanced his position, he merely perfected it, remaining, so to speak, within the very same site which he had occupied at the beginning of his literary career. In his old age, immensely experienced as he was, he had profited by everything, been changed by nothing. So, just as his religious position continued steadily to clear itself, without the necessity of any difficult reconsideration, in the same way his literary position never changed. And not only his fundamental beliefs about art, but also his more practical doctrines about poetry, served him reliably all his life, sparing him either the troubles of perplexity or the labour of steadfast self-examination.

The basis of his critical practice, if he can be said to have had one, was empirical. For him the sufficient test of a work was whether or not it gave delight ; and, no absolute test of merit being of any use, a man’s judgment, which could only be exercised on the amount of pleasure given, would depend for its value on the nature of his artistic sensibility. His upholding of this idea almost amounts to an insistence on the distinction between the assessing and the explaining functions of the critic; though he is perhaps weakened by not recognising clearly enough that there may be different kinds, as well as different degrees of critical acuteness. If this is so, his touchstone was, first and foremost, the amount of his own pleasure derived from an unbiassed consideration of the object, before which his reason would “contribute willingly its assent, so far as it sees convenient.” But, owing to a quality sufficiently obvious in Dryden’s own character, his practice does not, at first sight, seem to agree with this contention.

For just as he wrote in any form that presented itself, preferring one to another not so much because what he wished to say could better be embodied in it, as because his particular dexterity was better suited to the exploiting of the form itself; in the same way, although he was expert in arguing, the impulse to it came not from his desire for better understanding of difficult questions, but frankly from his enjoyment of that form of mental exercise. He was fond of making a case, but uninterested in independent analysis, and, characteristically, in actual argument he would depend rather on finding errors in his adversaries’ tactics than on attempting to overthrow their premises.

This was made clear early in his career. For between the years 1663 and 1668 he carried on a leisurely pamphlet discussion, becoming rather embittered towards the end, with his brother-in-law, Sir Robert Howard. Rhyme was becoming fashionable on the stage; Dryden, a marvellously good hand at rhyming, applauded the fashion, while Sir Robert, having less facility, disliked it : both set to work gravely to dispute the question (almost an ethical one) whether it were right that rhyming verses should be admitted to the theatres. They employed various arguments. Dryden relied chiefly on the doctrine that blank verse is ‘‘ lower ” than the heroic couplet, and admittedly too low for a “ poem” (by which he meant an epic), or even for a “ copy of verses”: but tragedy is ‘by Aristotle, in the dispute betwixt the epic poesy and the dramatic, for many reasons, he there alleges, ranked above it”?; therefore, suitable as blank verse might be for comedy, for tragedy it could not fail to be too low. Sir Robert held the more British attitude that rhyme was unnatural in conversation, therefore absurd in a play : and even Lord Orrery’s use of it, with the “ greatness of its majesty ” and his “ particular happiness,” though it employed his wonder, yet failed to convince his reason. Neither of them, however, attempted to analyse either the real nature of rhyme itself, or that of the pleasure which, presumably, the audiences derived from it; although Sir Robert bowed, after all, to that decision, by introducing rhymed passages into his own plays, which he did, he said, in order “not to appear singular, the danger of the vanity being greater than the error.”

In a good-humoured way, Dryden was prepared to do anything that fashion dictated. He would write the plays the public wanted, and use the critical arguments which the public endorsed as sound; but he did so neither from fear of diverging nor from a fundamental desire to be fashionable. For he had deep-seated instincts, and as soon as they were engaged, he dropped the formalities of coffee-house criticism, and, speaking boldly from his own emotions, he wrote such things as the Characters of Shakespeare, Beaumont and Fletcher, and Ben Jonson, in the Essay on Dramatic Poesy, and of Chaucer in the later Preface to the Fables. ‘These are declarations of the freedom of the literary conscience, and in them there is no question of easygoing acceptance of the mode: he speaks from the heart; but whether he had a settled critical position remains still doubtful. Of Shakespeare— “ when he describes anything, you more than see it, you feel it too.” Of Chaucer— “ here is God’s plenty. We have our forefathers and our greatgrand-dames all before us as they were in Chaucer’s days.” The appeal is all to experience, and he carries his inquiries no further. For he would exercise his wit in pointing out what was to be expected from various authors (as in his comparison of Shakespeare, Beaumont and Fletcher, and Jonson): he would unhesitatingly sweep away received dogmas which conflicted with experience (as sometimes in his treatment of the ‘‘ Unities”) ; but he would never put himself to the pains of initiating a research into the connection between works of art themselves and the emotions which they liberated in him.

Words came easily to him. Once he had divined his thought, it can have taken him but little time to find the proper phrase to express it. In his later years, particularly, he has himself remarked the ease with which he composed, the only difficulty being to choose whether to “run” his thoughts into verse or to “ give them the other harmony of prose.” “ Thoughts,” he says, “ come thronging so fast upon me”—and indeed they did; so fast that, except when there was some definite obstacle to be removed or overcome, it was always invincibly easier to move on to the next thought which presented itself than to remain digging deeper about the roots of the last.

“ Shakespeare . . . was the man who, of all modern and perhaps ancient poets, had the largest and most comprehensive soul. All the images of nature were still present to him.” This is from the Essay on Dramatic Poesy ; and thirty-two years later, in the Preface to the Fables, we find that Chaucer “ must have been a man of a most wonderful comprehensive nature. ... Not a single character has escaped him”; and so on, through the characters of both. Of both he speaks at once justly and enthusiastically, and neither Chaucer nor Shakespeare have so far received more noble praise. It may be praise critically conferred, but it is not criticism. For here, as everywhere else, Dryden does not probe into his subjects, either to analyse their methods or to deduce anything bearing generally on aesthetics. His object is nearly always one of two things: either to defend against objections, or to praise with discrimination. But the arguments brought forward for these purposes were at the end of his life chosen as dispassionately as in his youth, and almost as incautiously.

In the passage on Chaucer his first business is to praise him: “ He is a perpetual fountain of good sense ; learned in all sciences; and, therefore, speaks properly on all subjects. As he knew what to say, so he knows also when to leave off; a continence which is practised by few writers, and scarcely by any of the ancients, excepting Virgil and Horace. One of our late great poets is sunk in his reputation, because he could never forgive any conceit which came in his way ; but swept, like a drag-net, great and small.” The modern writer was evidently Cowley. A page or two further on he wishes to answer some objections relating to his present work. It had been suggested that the Canterbury Tales were too poor and dry to be worth reviving: Cowley himself had thought so: “I dare not advance my opinion against the judgment of so great an author,” and “ sometimes also, though not often, he (Chaucer) runs riot, like Ovid, and knows not when he has said enough. But there are more great wits beside Chaucer, whose fault is their excess of conceits, and those ill sorted. An author is not to write all he can, but only all he ought.” In fact, whatever his object was, and however ardently pursued, he was always making a case, rather than trying to understand; so that for success he relied on the ingenuity of his invention more than on the rich fruits of his study.

That Dryden thought chiefly of the immediate practical advantage or entertainment to be derived from each piece of criticism as he wrote it, may diminish his absolute authority: it has nothing to do with the final value of any of his pronouncements, judged separately and on their merits. Indeed, it throws little light on the extent of his critical faculty : it only makes it difficult to decide just when that faculty is being seriously exercised, or to demonstrate just where his truest critical beliefs are to be found.

For it is useless to make a selection of remarks on some point drawn here and there from his essays without a guarantee that it includes every single thing he ever said on that particular subject. By partial selection, there are few attitudes which could not be well illustrated, with a plausible implication that they were Dryden’s own: which might well, in a way, be true. But it follows that there are few questions upon which all his pronouncements agree with one another. To prove his freedom from imperfect ideas on morality and art, you may point to the Preface to the Indian Emperor, better known as the Defence of the Essay, and quote, “I am satisfied if it cause delight, for delight is the chief, if not the only end of poesy.” But if any weight is given to that, just as much must be allowed to the Preface to Tyrannic Love, written only two years later, in which he says, “I considered that pleasure was not the only end of poesy; and that even the instructions of morality were not so wholly the business of a poet, as that the precepts and examples of piety were to be omitted.” Similarly, in the Essay, when the discussion turns on the value of the Unities, Neander proves that their restrictions may be definitely harmful, and that reliance on them, as giving merit per se, is absurd ; but in the same year in which the Lssay was printed, he could say, in the Preface to Secret Love, that the play was “ regular according to the strictest of dramatic laws: . .. a commendation which many of our poets now despise, and a beauty which our common audiences do not easily discern.”

In his writings you seldom find anything irrelevant : he thought too clearly for that, and sound reasoning was a necessity which he recognised gladly and continuously. He did not feel it equally incumbent on him to search very deeply for permanent principles underlying his permanent enthusiasms — for, after all, most of his tastes were undeniably enthusiastic and lasting. And for the rest, the argumentative, the theoretical, or the combative part of him — that all matured, and, in his later essays, to the brilliance and fire and lucidity of his earlier work there is added some touch of secure and unpresumptuous dignity, as though the consciousness of undisputed greatness, which old age, in spite of defeats in every other point, had brought him, had, in removing all temptation towards the self-assertiveness of his youth, made natural to him in the end an ampler modesty.

This deepening of his character is shown up clearly by his behaviour in a wide-spreading controversy which took its course during the last three years of his life, and into which, as a younger man, he would certainly have plunged whole-heartedly, As it was, when Jeremy Collier let fly with his Short View of the Immorality and Profaneness of the English Stage, Dryden stood aside, ‘and left the business of a serious answer to the younger stage-poets, to Congreve, Durfey, and Sir John Vanbrugh ; who one and all did just as Dryden himself had done in less important circumstances, thirty years before : they spent their strength in denying particular applications, and never tried to understand what their accuser was really up to.

Now Collier played very fair (a point noticed and admired by Lord Macaulay), in that he laid all his cards on the table, and, in the first chapter of his book, made clear both his intentions in the work, and the exact premises on which he was about to argue. The opening words are: “The business of Plays is to recommend Virtue, and discountenance Vice”; and a little lower, “ this design has been oddly pursued by the English Stage. Our poets write with a different view, and are gone into another interest... . Show, Musick, Action, and Rhetorick are moving Entertainments; and, rightly employ’d, would be very significant. But Force and Motion are Things indifferent, and the Use lies chiefly in the Application. These Advantages are now in the Enemie’s Hand, and under a very dangerous Management. Like Cannon seiz’d, they are pointed the wrong way.” Indeed the poets took intolerable liberties, “ viz. Their Smuttiness of Expression; their Swearing, Prophaneness, and Lewd Application of Scripture; ‘Their Abuse of the Clergy ; Their making their top Characters Libertines, and giving them Success in their Debauchery.”

This, then, was his quarrel with the poets; that they had not fulfilled the duties of their calling, but had wasted their time in profanity and smut. Then, if you believed that audiences must always find themselves irresistibly impelled to imitate whatever they see done or said (by whatever character) on the stage—if, in fact, the stage is a kind of mirror in which the spectators see an anticipation and forecast of themselves (for that was Collier’s view)—it follows that the players, who might so easily have led the town to virtue, were instead coldly teaching atheism and immorality. So Collier flung them down and stamped upon them, not for being bawdy themselves but for making others so. And their sins of omission were still greater: they rarely recommended virtue and were never found discountenancing vice.

Thus, throughout the work, he never forgot that the stage was a kind of more efficacious pulpit. Obscenity or a jest at a parson are revolting at any time, but they naturally take on a further and more hideous importance when they usurp the very seat of instruction. He found a good example in Dryden’s opera, King Arthur, where we have “‘ Genii, and Angels, Cupids, Syrens, and Devils ; Venus and St. George, Pan and the Parson, the Hell of Heathenism and the Hell of Revelation ; a fit of smut, and then a jest about Original Sin.” Throughout the opera there is a sustained mixture of heathen mythology and Christian doctrine (“ this Mr. Dryden very religiously calls a Fairy Way of Writing ”) : Styx and Phlegethon are mentioned in the same breath as the actual devils of Tophet or the torments of the really damned. ‘Thus was the young libertine heartened and vice made bold and enterprising. But worse remained: the poet having “‘ diverted himself with the terrors of Christianity ” produced a so-called harvest-catch, in which one verse, sung by the harvesters, begins :—

We ha’ cheated the Parson, we’ll cheat him again, 
For why should a blockhead have one in ten ? 
For prating so long like a Booklearned Sot,
Till pudding and dumpling burn to pot.

“I don’t question but these four lines steal many a Pound in the year. Whether the Muse stands indictable or not, the Law must determine.”

The greater part of the book consists of charges like these, and he ranges wide and strong over the whole field of contemporary drama. At the end he sums up his case, and there again stress is laid not on the wickedness shown on the stage, but on that promoted in the audience. Not that he pretended to think that every single spectator fell a victim: “’tis a hard battle where none escapes.” But “ when the subject is agreeable, a lively Representation, and a passionate way of Expression, make wild work, and have a strange force upon the Blood and Temper.”

So there was his case: and, so far, it had been made consistently. But he went further. Having started by saying that the business of the drama was to instruct, he ended by condemning the stage to utter abolishment, and produced the Sense of Antiquity and the Testimony of the Fathers on the point. Clemens Alexandrinus found no name for the stage fitter than the “ Chair of Pestilence ” : Minutius Felix felt as strongly : Lactantius’ testimony showed that the subject of Comedy was the Debauching of Virgins, and the Amours of Strumpets : Chrysostom (to pass over St. Ambrose) found smutty songs more abominable than stench and ordure: Tertullian, St. Jerome, and St. Augustine left the matter in no doubt. The stage and all its players should be completely suppressed.

The replies of Congreve and Vanbrugh were prompt and amusing, but ineffectual: from the outset they gave themselves away. Perhaps they felt themselves disarmed by a fact which Mr. Collier very well recognised, when he said, “ And, after all, the jest on’t is, these Men would make us believe their Design is Virtue and Reformation. In good time.” Anyhow, they argued against him with as little profundity as Dryden had against Sir Robert Howard, merely protesting that their writings were not so smutty after all. Dryden’s behaviour contrasted remarkably with theirs, and gives us as clear a glimpse, as we can now hope for, of his own feelings in his at last acknowledged literary supremacy.

In the Preface to the Fables, and at the beginning of the story called Cymon and Iphigenia, he made, casually, some remarks which go nearer to answering Collier than anything of Congreve’s or Vanbrugh’s. “From immoral plays, to no plays,” he said, “ab abusu ad usum, non valet consequentia”’: thereby destroying the last part of his argument. And, for the rest, he contented himself with pointing out how strained were some of the examples quoted ; also how otiose the elucidations, from which he drew some effortless lines of satire:

The world will think that what we loosely write 
Though now arraign’d, he read with some delight ; 
Because he seems to chew the cud again
When his broad comment makes the text too plain ; 
And teaches more in one explaining page
Than all the double meanings of the stage.
What needs he paraphrase on what we mean ?
We were at worst but wanton ; he’s obscene.

And he said no more about the matter, accounting for his silence by an admission that in many things he had been taxed justly : “ I have pleaded guilty to all thoughts and expressions of mine which can be truly argued of obscenity, profaneness, or immorality, and retract them.” Even he did not quite understand how the question stood.

And as to the retaliations of his colleagues, it seems, from his own conduct, that he was less interested in their arguments than in their belief of Collier’s great importance ; since, for his own part, he thought all this business rather trivial; and came to that conclusion in a way remarkably characteristic of himself. Because he made, to some extent, a frank confession, it must must not be concluded that he felt himself unable to reply. ‘The fact is, he saw that the issue could not profitably be joined on that ground, while, in the proper sphere of contest, the truth or otherwise of Collier’s particular assertions was irrelevant. For he expressly stated that he expected his fellow-poets to make effective answer, “and neither they nor he could think Mr. Collier so formidable an enemy that they should shun him.” Now, if he had erred in his own plays, he knew that all the others were in the same plight. Others, not he alone, had “dilated upon the Argument of Love”; had “ treated it home,” and in the “ most tender and passionate manner imaginable”: others had written songs “ rampantly lewd and irreligious to a flaming excess”: others had “ put coarse usage upon the clergy.” Yet he expected them easily to make a victorious defence. Clearly, therefore, he perceived that such things as these, though the cataloguing of them formed the bulk of Collier’s book, were not themselves the essence of his subject.

However, although ripe age and knowledge of the real value of his own achievements prevented him from descending into trivialities which did not concern him, he still did not trouble himself to penetrate deeper into the question. He felt certain of Collier’s futility, but did not take the further step which would have shown him that he was futile only in so far as the question was one of art: with which, in fact, he did not deal at all. That Dryden did not go so far as to formulate this, when he might so easily have done so, is much to be deplored, even though nothing that he could have written then would have altered immediate events. Jeremy Collier did not cause, nor could Dryden’s most noble arguments have prevented, the decline into which English drama was now to settle. Causes stronger than either of them were at work.

Presumably, however, Dryden did not understand how different the world of London was becoming from that which he had known in his first days of authorship ; and, even if he had, he would have seen the hopelessness of attempting to stop change by reasonable arguments. He had heard and propounded such, without number, on questions of literature, but not one of them had ever influenced him decisively in the choice of any form or manner. ‘The necessity of earning money, and his own inclinations, had alone determined him: arguments had followed. He had always been satisfied with his tastes, and he remained so to the end of his life: the only © changes which he saw happening there were simple refinements, easily accounted for. Nothing could make him think that anything was bad which he admired ; and if anything he liked were attacked, he would think out for it a logical defence. Otherwise he was incurious about his own attachments, and also, therefore, about the nature of art itself.

Accordingly, if one wishes to sum up his critical belief, one must first admit he had never consciously formulated one, or felt the need of doing so. Why he had been so incurious, why he had never wished to dissect his own artistic emotions, is a psychological question, depending on his character and the habits of the times. But we have a hint, in the combination which he displays of lack of originality with brilliant individual taste. His own emotions were too cleanly savoured to let him admit any partial or tendentious analysis, as he would have had to do in accepting any ready-made scheme: while his inability to originate (reinforced by his intellectual laziness) would have prevented him from evolving a system of his own. Perhaps, therefore, his incuriosity was in a sense deliberate, or half-consciously acquiesced in: certainly, for that very reason, he would have turned the more readily to that light and more or less conventional discussion which he excelled in, and into which he used now and again to drop, as though by accident, some idea which, though surrounded by superficialities, reveals him as a critic of superb resources.

His arguments were often selected with but little deliberation ; but he was throughout consistent in the purposes for which he used them. He never really believed that rules were or could be binding on practice, and he felt that every work of art might, in a sense, create its own code by which it would exist and by which alone it could be judged. That is to say, that a critic must learn by study of a work itself, the rules which that work should (not necessarily does) obey; just as Aristotle, living in later times, would have framed his precepts differently.

And, secondly, he recognised the necessity of maintaining, along with this independence of rules, a high standard of taste. He wished to be able to enjoy everything that was worth enjoying, and indeed there was wide catholicity in his powers of appreciation. But to secure such freedom of enjoyment, it is necessary to approach each fresh play or poem with no preconceived notions of what it is to be; and at the same time, to keep his standards at a proper level, the comprehensive critic must keep his reason and his fancy bright with the consciousness of all his previous reading. Only so can he be qualified not to lose himself when chance takes him into strange walks. It was, partly, knowledge of that fact which made so many people exalt the rules, thinking that in them they could find a substitute for patience and the lessons of experience.

But Dryden would run no danger of maintaining his standard only at the cost of restricting the field over which he ranged. His highly cultivated and sober mind would check but would not hinder his imagination, which in turn inspired and moved but did not supersede the slower-moving reason. Each had in him, as in everyone, their parts to play, and they were mutually dependent. Reason by itself, he thought, is as immovyable as the other, unattached, is volatile: and he indicated very happily the ideal relationship between them, allowing that, though the imagination may sway the reason, the latter is in that case “a free-born subject, not a slave.”

Thus, he was more liberal in his literary ideas than the majority of his contemporaries. At least, he was better equipped than most to take full advantage of his opportunities, and to pass, with equal expectation of delight, through all the literature, classical, and modern, that was at his disposal. And as he was convinced that the private judgment was in the end the final test, for which it must be trained to use its own experience and be informed of that of others; so he thought that, though liberty brings with it to the mind a responsibility for which it must be educated, yet after all it remains liberty, and, as such, incompatible with any kind of restriction.

Now this kind of critical freedom might seem to sit oddly with his religious and political conservatism: the more so, since it deepened as he himself grew older, and the mind, which was steadily moving towards Roman Catholicism on one side, was on the other abandoning more and more completely any conception of dogmatism or authority in letters. But, in fact, his literary and his political and religious beliefs are just counterparts to each other. “I may safely say, that conscience is the royalty and prerogative of every private man. He is absolute in his own breast, and accountable to no earthly power for that which passes only betwixt God and him. Those who are driven into the fold are, generally speaking, rather made hypocrites than converts.”

It is true that this, from the Preface to The Hind and the Panther, sprang from an exigency of the times, when the English Roman Catholics were requiring help from, of all people, the Dissenters. But, in substance, it was what he felt to be true. And certainly he was well aware of the difference between real religion, or real literary feeling, and the mere counterfeits of either, which are all that can be produced by cold adherence to rules, whether of Aristotle or of the Church.

And for his political views, it must be remembered that Dryden, though an uncompromising Tory, had no faith in divine right, whether of kings or any other men. ‘To him it seemed that the king should reign and be obeyed not so much because revolution or disobedience were in themselves immoral, as because the appearance of such things indicated a state of affairs in which morality could no longer practically exist. Hobbes described civil disturbance and insurrection as “‘a return to confusion, and to the condition of a war of every man against every man, contrary to the end for which Monarchy had its first institution.” In which Dryden would have agreed, considering that revolution was either a surrender of everything that was civilised in the state, or else a confession of its emptiness: at the best it would be but a gamble on a losing hazard. His beliefs on monarchal absolutism and ecclesiastical authority were both arrived at coolly, and were held the more strongly for being based on temperate reasoning.

And if he felt so about politics, it is natural that his literary ideas also should have been what they were. The scepticism which kept him from being either a Whig or a reactionary, prevented his running into any extreme views in letters. For instance, he had seemed at times rather to disparage or patronise his predecessors, glorifying the art of his own times at the expense of the Elizabethans. But he had never seriously thought so lightly of them ; and it was only because he demanded eagerly, for himself and his contemporaries, at least a fair hearing, that he occasionally went too far towards belittling the writers of the previous age. In his own time, he was especially taxed for doing so in the epilogue to the Conquest of Granada, where he had said :—

And, as their comedy, their love was mean; 
Except, by chance, in some one laboured scene, 
Which must atone for an ill-written play.
They rose, but at their height could seldom stay. 
Fame then was cheap, and the first-comer sped ; 
And they have kept it since by being dead,—

and so on throughout the piece. But all that he really intended to do, was to insist that the modern plays should be allowed to stand or fall on their own merits, and not be condemned just for being unlike others, which were written in an age vastly different totheir own. “I would so maintain my opinion of the present age, as not to be wanting in my veneration for the past: I would ascribe to dead authors their just praise in those things wherein they havevexcelled us ; and in those wherein we contend with them for the pre-eminence, I would acknowledge our advantages to the age, and claim no victory from our wit.” And later, wishing that Congreve had the leisure to translate Homer, he spoke of him as living in a “ much better age than was the last. I mean for versification and the art of numbers; for in the drama we have not arrived to the pitch of Shakespeare and Ben Jonson.” Much as he detested the extravagance of “ companies of warm young men,” and those who would cry up anything new and fantastical, however contrary to reason, yet he would admit of no interference with the liberty of modern letters, provided it were used judiciously. Politically, monarchy seemed necessary in order to ensure : internal peace, which was in turn the necessary condition of productive life. In literature, too, the preservation of 4 continuity provided corresponding advantages, and helped authors to build on the achievements of the past, provided that their study of the ancients did not dull them into mere imitators. St. Evremond expressed the most educated view of the proper use of antiquity when he said: ‘Ils formeront notre jugement, et le jugement réglera la disposition des choses présentes.” So much was particularly obvious to an age of experimental science, which would tolerate no ipse dixit in its poetry, any more than in its philosophy. Besides, to imitate the Elizabethans, in particular, was by Dryden’s time a hopeless task: as he said, “ There is scarce an humour, a character, or any kind of plot, which they have not used. . . . This, therefore, will be a good argument to us either not to write at all, or to attempt some other way. ‘There is no bays to be expected in their walks.”

But this is only speculation. Dryden’s practice provides the only evidence for the nature of his beliefs, and whatever form we may suppose for these, is only interesting, in so far as it can be referred back again to, and in turn illuminate, his work. And what I take to have been their most important effect on that, has already been indicated earlier in this essay. Freedom from literary dogmas combined in the most fortunate way imaginable with native qualities of his own, to prevent him from being hampered in his work by any divergence between principle and inclination. For the whole course of his thinking led him to the conviction that anything could become poetry in a poet’s hands—for so he thought, even though it was only his wish to defend his practice of taking ready-made plots for his plays that first made him express this clearly. Also, his lack of creative power, together with (what is partly the same thing) his laziness of mind, which was extensive, although Etherege would not allow that it was “‘ noble,” — all this kept him free from powerful impulses towards any particular forms or subjects: and he emphatically considered himself to be a poet. Therefore he had no artistic misgivings about the constructive possibilities of anything which his fancy might light upon, or, more often, which managers or publishers might ask for.

Another consideration helped to make it easy for him to respond whole-heartedly to the demand of the moment. Like almost everyone of his time, he had no unduly exalted notions of the dignity of the poet’s calling. He professed only to delight the age in which he lived, and, in doing so, he never felt that he might be called upon for any sacrifice of artistic integrity. It is true that, before an injudicious audience, stuff might pass for good which, in his own eyes, did not correspond with the height of his powers ; so much he confesses, and blames himself for allowing it to happen. But in that event his fault lay not in undertaking the task, but in taking insufficient pains over it. He never quarrelled with the forms upon which he had to work: and he despised the crowd, not for the things which they demanded, but for being contented with such imperfect examples of them.

Not that all forms came equally easily to him. He admitted that in comedy he never felt at ease. He was unfitted for it by what he called the “ sullenness of his humour,” and in general he disliked being “ the Sisyphus of the stage.” But in his complaints on that score, though there is regret, there is no bitterness. Vanity, naturally, would not let him be satisfied with a situation in which he saw himself being equalled, and even excelled, by men whose general powers he knew to be inferior to his own. In this he felt that he was unfortunate, but not that he was wronged: so that, for all his general regrets, his approach to each particular piece of work could be sufficiently serene.

This serenity was the immediate condition which made possible the production of just such works as Dryden’s. It enabled him to adopt an attitude towards his own writings that is at once intimate and detached: and without that combination he would not hold the place in English letters that he does. For he could identify himself with any form that was proposed to him, without ever becoming enslaved. The work that he did invariably left him more supple, and never imposed upon him any permanent bent: he never stiffened. And, as a result, he could use a wonderful diversity of forms, and genuinely exploit each one. Unhampered by habits formed in other ways of writing, he would approach a new mould, and at once seize upon the advantages peculiar to itself. And he never used his technical ability in a desire merely to excel or astonish: behind it and within it, there always existed, very vigorously, a simple affection, even devotion, for his art. And so, whatever he handled, since he used appropriate means, he was likely to improve ; and his sincerity teaching him to foster growth within, rather than to force by external pressure, his improvements were lasting and decisive. This is the reason why he offers no chances to parody. He never wrested his materials or buffeted them. And because they were treated gently and allowed to grow on their own natural lines, they display no extravagance or recurring mannerism. It is also the reason why, reviewing his own achievements, Dryden accounted for them as he did. He had seldom made any definite choice, and had never broken out in any clear originality. But in all the various fields of his activity he had moved with the same strength and grace, relying on the same instruments of prose and verse. He may not have attempted to say anything new. But inside the limits which he found he had undoubtedly created a harmony unknown before him. And although the language may not have acquired from him any quite fresh powers, he at least taught it a sounder economy, so that it could fulfil its functions with less effort, and, therefore, more graciously. Whether or not his ambition had always been, consciously, to do so, we may doubt: but his work, by itself, was enough to ensure that poetry alone should not go backward, at a time when, as he said, all other arts and sciences were advancing.