PARNASSUS TO LET

Art-Forms decay and are continually renewed.

The progress of science has a hand in this change.

The primitive epic, the chanson de geste, the ballad were all for recital. Literature was then a temporal art, just as music still is for the vast majority of people. But with the invention of printing by Gutenberg about 1450 the course of literature began to be changed. There was no longer any necessity for poems and chronicles to be read aloud. Those who wished to, and were rich enough, could possess them, printed, as a book, and read and reread them at their will. Literature began to lose its temporal quality. A man could get to know a poem or a story so well that he could review it in retrospect as a whole, just as if it were a painting, and he standing back at the correct distance; whereas, previously, only the first and last lines with a few striking passages in between had remained in his memory, standing out like peaks above the intervening valleys sunk in mist. With the bound book present on his shelf, as soon as one part of the story or poem became dim, he could easily revivify his memory by rereading that part and so restore the image. Much modern poetry that is thought to be difficult and obscure is so only because the sequence of ideas is no longer temporal; it is logical, but its point of departure and point of return are dictated by the artist’s whim. The result is that at the first reading the poem is unintelligible, in fact it cannot be understood until the last line has been read, the complete circle described, and the poet’s image recreated three-dimensionally in the reader’s mind.

This change in the temporal quality of literature has altered the course of such art-forms as the epic, the chanson de geste, and the ballad. This is not to say that these art-forms are now never used. Mr Robert Graves has shown that it is still possible for the ballad to recur spontaneously in times of abnormality—but with a difference. Even Paradise Lost compared to the Iliad is like Liverpool Cathedral compared to Salisbury. The epic has passed by and crossed over towards the drama, as can be seen from Browning’s Ring and the Book and Hardy’s Dynasts.

But what new art-forms can we point to?

The novel and the cinema.

The novel is not much more than a century and a half old, despite Apuleius, Lyly, and Addison. Of course, all modern histories of the novel start at least one or two thousand years ago and trace minutely throughout all literatures the indications of its coming birth. Unfortunately no one noticed these indications at the time; and it was not until the novel was an accomplished fact that the old pointers were discovered standing and (what is more) all pointing in the same direction. 

The cinema is the newest of all the arts and has as yet barely come of age. Walt Whitman unconsciously was its prophet; and like the novel it has had its pointers too, but these are only just beginning to be discovered: in places Shakespeare’s Antony and Cleopatra reads more like a film scenario than a drama, and what is Hogarth’s Marriage 4 la Mode but the first six-reel comedy? Its birth was the fruit of an unnatural attachment between the drama and painting, who called in science to act the midwife; and at times this offspring still betrays its bastard origin by making the mistake of imitating too closely either parent art. Most people will allow that the drama mothered the cinema; but such a paternity is certain to be called in question.

Since the time of Cimabue, painting has been freed from the necessity of being the handmaid successively of religion, history, morality (not to mention high-class pornography) and Portraiture: this last by the scientific invention of photography in the last century. Without doubt painters will still continue to use all these as excuses to cover up the intolerable nudity of their aesthetic ideas. But to-day a young man wishing to have a likeness of himself finds a Cecil Beaton more reliable than a Picasso. In the photographer’s studio he will be photographed in a sequence of different positions with all the usual accessories, Apart from the question of the photographer’s imagination or a certain talent in the sitter, how far are we here from Charlie Chaplin in his one-man film, One A.M.? And, once Chaplin admitted, all the rest follows.

The cinema (for the good of its soul!) started out without textbooks telling it how it should go about to work; and what it has learnt during these first twenty years of its life, it has learnt by experience. The technique of scenario writing has been vastly improved, so much so in Chaplin’s case that it has been improved away altogether, for his latest films have been directly created without written script. This is of importance, for it shows how completely the cinema has now succeeded in casting off the shackles of  literature, everywhere except in some European and American backwaters where old faults and prejudices. still linger on. For too long literature poisoned the cinema by making her the most tempting offers of plots and titles —tempting, because the plots offered were ready-made and the titles of proved publicity value. Literature is one art, the cinema another: it was impossible that the cinema should continue to take orders from Lady Literature and live below stairs, And it is significant that out of the following random list of good films not one happens to be a screen adaptation of a novel or a play: The Cruiser Potemkin, The Cabinet of Dr Caligari, The Woman of Paris, Warning Shadows, The Salvation Hunters, Vaudeville, The Pilgrim, Berlin, and The Marriage Circle. In all these the cinema has found, more by intuition than by anything else, her true technique. 

Apart from the superficial attraction, of literature, the cinema (as its origin made inevitable) has had to learn how to escape from the danger of dramatic scenes and pictorial shots. For many years intelligent appreciation of films was held up by the appalling stupidity of scenes, which may once have been dramatic on the stage, but which had been so literally translated into the cinema that they became deserts of monotony wherein long close-ups of the emotional heroine were divided from long close-ups of the passionate hero by wads of subtitles that were supposed to make articulate the incessant lip-service of the two stars. Producers have at last learnt the danger of retarding the visual action by subtitle after subtitle, and have even found it possible, as in the case of Warning Shadows, to produce quite intelligible films without any subtitles at all. Except in the case of comedies where a good joke is never amiss, it is safe to say that, the fewer and shorter the subtitles, the more chance for the film itself,

Similar, but not so obvious, is the danger of the pictorial shot. The most essential quality of the cinema being motion, it stands to reason that any Pictorial shot is apt to make a film static and to sap its dynamic force. Sometimes this is harmless. A still photograph of a landscape may act as an excellent jumping-off place at the beginning of a film, before the action has had time to gather way. A similar still is useful at the end, to bring the audience’s feelings back to the normal plane. Three stills of three different stone lions, shown in rapid succession at the beginning of the bombardment of Odessa in The Cruiser Potemkin, gave the same plastic and rousing effect as three notes blown on a trumpet. One 17 of the most notable moments in Berlin, was when the rhythmic acceleration emotional tension, and musical climax of the arrival by train were suddenly succeeded by quiet photographic stills; of the city, lifeless as a picture postcard in the dawn, of the smokeless factories, of the deserted streets: each accompanied by a low chord pianissimo. Still followed after still, like so many lantern slides, until down an exhausted street came the first wind of the day, blowing a piece of white paper along the dry pavement, over and over. As for pictorial shots, one of a prison scene in the prologue to Vaudeville was obviously based on a well-known painting of Van Gogh’s La Ronde des Prisonniers, which (it seems not to be so well known) Van Gogh painted after Doré. But the mere fact that the prisoners were in motion was sufficient to preserve the prologue from any ill effect that an absolutely static shot might have had on it. On the other hand, there was a scene in The Woman of Paris, where a mother was bowed in grief over the bier of her son, which, although not directly reminiscent of any known painting, was definitely pictorial in quality, and left an unpleasant feeling in the audience’s mind, partly of false emphasis and partly of sentimentality.

These few examples are sufficient to show that the cinema has gained its experience in a hard field, threatened by false bogeys, hindered by the absence of tradition. Before it can go forward with fresh strength and more directness of purpose, the ground it has covered must be critically examined and the foundations of a true tradition laid. The time for that has now come. But although during the last few years the cinema has drawn forth a host of ephemeral literature (most of it French), none of it seems to give serious consideration to what (at least to judge 5 the other arts) ought to be a most important element in any film—namely Rhythm. Film-producers themselves naturally have little spare time or inclination to experiment—their job is too risky for that. And so it is that the knowledge of rhythm in the cinema remains extremely vague. For though a certain amount may be gathered from analogy with the other arts, yet in the end the true laws and manifestations of rhythm in the cinema will have to be found out by trial and experiment in that medium alone. What follows in this essay is a loose and all too inadequate attempt towards a synthesis. Any analogy shall be drawn mainly from English poetry where the workings of rhythm can most easily be followed: analogies drawn from painting or from music (however modern) are liable to prove deceptive. 

Gerard Manley Hopkins, to whom the debt of the Sitwells, Miss Stein, and even James Joyce is obvious but as yet unacknowledged, wrote in 1883 (two years before Stevenson’s pleasant but too curious essay on the technical elements of style in literature) a preface to his unpublished poems, wherein we find the following passage concerning the rhythm of the English five-foot verse — “If, however, the reversal (trochee for iamb) is repeated in two feet running, especially so as to include the sensitive second foot, it must be due either to great want of ear or else is a calculated effect, the superinducing or mounting of a new rhythm upon the old; and since the new or mounted rhythm is actually heard and at the same time the mind naturally supplies the natural or standard foregoing rhythm, for we do not forget what the rhythm is that by rights we should be hearing, two rhythms are in some manner running at once and we have something answerable to counterpoint in music, which is two or more strains of tune going on together, and this is Counterpoint Rhythm.” ‘This passage is most interesting and enlightening, especially for its inaccuracies. The musical analogy is inexact, probably owing to some confusion in Hopkins’s mind over the exact meaning of tune. One is left with the suspicion that he did not realise that a single unaccompanied tune can have rhythm (just as well as a passage in intricate counterpoint), so long as the single tune in itself implies a metre. It is because Hopkins ignores metre that he is led into the difficulty of making unnecessary distinctions between two or three different rhythms, whereas what he calls natural or standard rhythm is really metre, and his counterpoint rhythm, rhythm itself. With these substitutions the passage becomes quite comprehensible. It seems that wherever we find rhythm there must be, underlying, some simple metre. In French verse this metre may be numerical, a fixed number of syllables to each line; in English accentual, as in the following scheme, --|--|--|.-|.-; in music a common metre is made up by four regularly recurring accents of the following roughly proportional intensities: 4 2 3 1. Consequently, in examining rhythm in the cinema we must look for what can be used as an underlying metre. The metre found may not be strictly adhered to; but, as always, exceptions will only help to prove the rule. To begin with, a certain number of examples will be collected, wherein several films have appeared to possess obvious, pleasing and successful rhythms.

An excellent example of simple episodic rhythm, remarked by most people, occurred in Chaplin’s great film, The Woman of Paris. ‘There the arrival of a train in a provincial station was indicated by a gradually slowing succession of lighted oblongs thrown across the station wall from the carriage windows. Simultaneously with this motor pattern the woman (who was standing on the platform) moved her face across in the same direction, but very much more slowly, as she watched the arrival of this train that was to take her to Paris. A local metre had been set up, regular visually, geometrically progressive temporally; and above that, a simple movement, sufficient to make the whole scene absolutely thrilling.

An intelligent experiment in the rousing of emotion by rhythmic acceleration was made in the first edition of an English film, The Little People. The first shots of the film showed the slow beating of a drum to attract people to the performance of a marionette show. One saw people hear the drum and start swaying their heads in time with it. Then, as the speed of the beating increased, one saw the villagers going to the show, walking at first, children tripping up in their hurry, and finally the audience clapping rapidly, Following three isolated drum taps, the curtain rose and the show began. How successful this his opening scene would have been with the public cannot be said, as the film was only released in a most unfortunately mutilated condition.

But it is doubtful whether any film before The Salvation Hunters showed a conscious effort made to set up a continuous rhythmic feeling; and there it only persisted strongly through the first half of the film, the scene of which was laid on a mud-dredger. This dredger worked continuously, either the claw-bucket travelling up and down dribbling filth, or the crane-neck swinging out over the mud-barge and back. This was movement in three dimensions of a slow but regular kind, and it proved to be soothing and not distracting. Other shots had the usual fixed backgrounds of walls, doors, etc. And these two series of scenes were alternated in certain simple ratios, according to the demands of the action as it moved through one scene to another. Here, at first, it is difficult to say whether we have an example of simple or counterpoint rhythm in its truest sense: whether the regularly recurring movements of the dredger, or the simple permutations and combinations of the scenes with moving and fixed backgrounds, provide the metre.

This film, made at a negligible cost by an enterprising group of Hollywood unemployed, came in for some curious treatment at the hands of the critics. Iris Barry in her disappointing book, Let's Go to the Pictures, speaks of it as follows:— “ Chaplin, one heard, hailed the picture as a masterpiece. When Chaplin opens his mouth, all the critics yap in unison. The Salvation Hunters was acclaimed throughout the world. It was a dismal failure. When it had gone its rounds, Chaplin said that he had thought he would see whether the cinema audiences had any sense. He thought he would praise a bad picture and see how many would swallow what he said.” This little trick of Chaplin’s lacks confirmation: let it suffice to point out that on the strength of this picture alone he took Georgia Hale and starred her in The Gold Rush in the place of Lita Grey. Iris Barry was not the only critic who misunderstood the importance of The Salvation Hunter, Other critics made the same mistake probably because they were unused to any sensible handling of rhythm in films, and distrusted the term itself on account of its misuse by directors of the so-called absolute or abstract films that hail from Paris. 

The average Englishman is so afraid of having his leg pulled by Jean Cocteau or any of Cocteau’s friends to-day, that he is apt to lose his temper instead of laughing. Just as Comte Etienne de Beaumont’s drawing-room ballet, Mercure, as irresponsible as a charade, annoyed the London critics when Diaghilev put it on in the summer of 1927, so the Comte’s abstract film, entitled A Quoi Révent les Feunes Films? puzzled and upset the cinema critics in 1925. The truth is that the film proved to be faintly amusing but plotless. There was no interest to link together the jumble of haphazard photographs, many of which had obviously been based on the studies of Man Ray. Entracte was a little better because it contained at least the shadow of an idea, scenes of an eccentric funeral being shown alternately in quick and slow motion. Then came the Ballet Mécanique of Fernand Léger, George Antheil, and Dudley Murphy, of which the French critic, Monsieur Charensol, has spoken as_ follows :—“Usually in every film there are two absolutely distinct ele: ments, the subject and its realisation: the first appealing to the intellect and the second to the visual sense, But in the Ballet Mécanique the authors have entirely done away with the subject, leaving the spectator free to concentrate on the visual realisation. This is composed of a succession of pictures: animate and inanimate objects, machines, tools, and geometric forms, following each other in obedience to a preconceived rhythm.” Nothing could be clearer or more preposterous. Probably the best of all these films has been Man Ray’s own Emak Bakia, the Basque title of which emphasises its lack of pretentiousness. This film did not aim at being a complete work of art; it was content to offer itself merely as a sequence of extracts from a sensitive artist’s notebook. And that is really what all the other abstract films are— just a collection of rough jottings and fragments, valuable only in so much as they have improved somewhat the range and standard of a photography whose only previous licence had been to photograph all its fluffy heroines fou at sentimental moments, and have given directors a clue for such abstract aberrations as might be dictated by the subject of their films—for example, the dream in The Nibelungs, the acrobatic and the fair scenes in VY audeville, the machinery in Berlin and Metropolis —and for such superimpositions as ma be found in the German World War films and Gance’s Napoleon, or such virtual superimpositions as the stock exchange, factory, and war scenes in Pudowkin’s End of St Petersburg, which are alternated so quickly that the eye can no longer distinguish between them and take them in separately.

It is not the abstract film, but the right use of the abstract shot, that is important in so far as cinematic rhythm is concerned, because the abstract shot Provides an easy and obvious way of obtaining contrast and emphasis. That its full possibilities have not yet been exploited can be seen in quite minor films, such as Monte Blue’s Wolf’s Clothing, where an enterprising producer suddenly provided an excellently rhythmic scene on a New York subway where a train had got out of control, and also some very creditable attempts to portray the awakening feelings of a drunk man: distorting lenses being used on the people he saw, the furniture magnified to three or four times its usual size, and the actions of the bewildered man slightly slow-motioned.

The conclusion arrived at after the examination of abstract films, that it is not the abstract film but the abstract shot that is likely to prove of importance where cinematic rhythm is concerned, provides a clue that may be well worth following up. What is a shot? A shot is any length of film taken by the camera without break, and occupies normally the same time on the screen as in reality. As soon as the camera man ceases to turn the handle, the shot ends, even though the same scene, the same characters, may be used for the next shot. Although the shots are continuous on the screen (except where divided by subtitles, during which the rhythm of the film, and the acceptance of that rhythm by the audience, remains in suspense), yet the passage from one shot to another usually indicates a little temporal gap or mental comma; and may be said to act as a cesura. Naturally, care is taken during the cutting of a film to Tun the shots together in such a Sequence that the minimum of discomfort is experienced by the eye in jumping from one to another, The travelling camera has sometimes been used to try to smudge out these But the result is, that though the main parts of the shots have a fixed focus, the same as before, they are linked by a kind of no-man’s-land, of little importance in itself, because during the time that the camera its focus and imitates the mannerism; of the human eye it is practically jm. possible for any new movement of importance to be initiated. Op occasions this can be quite effective, although its use needs to be much more restrained than it was in The Rat Nevertheless, it may be truly said that these cesuras punctuate a film. We shall see from Vaudeville how important +t is that they should arrive at the just moment, not a fraction of a second late; and in The Salvation Hunters we have already found it necessary that where they divide two sets of scenes of different characteristics they should occur at intervals determined by suitably simple ratios.’ Then, may it not be that the basis of cinematic metre is caesural and not accentual? that rhythm is built up by motion and emotion deployed from shot to shot? whether in a continuous pattern, or a richer and more complicated woof wherein a certain thread of motion or emotion, instead of being developed straight forward, is dropped out of the pattern for a time, only to be taken up again later and the loose thread drawn on right across the intervening warp? 

It may be objected that a film has its accents just as much as a piece of music; that since a film makes its appeal to an audience through the particular to the general, so an accent is bound to occur as each particular point is made. This is true, A film certainly has its stresses, which may be caused in various ways; decrease of focal distance, lengthening of time value, any significant motion on the part of the actors. But these stresses are irregular in occurrence and always go to build up, oF drop away from, one of the climaxes in a film. Their growth arises out of the inner necessity of the subject, and so they cannot correspond to the regular accent that is the fundamental of musical metre. For, in any work of art, metre is a foundation which must be clearly established, or at least suggested; once set going it persists mechanically. Rhythm is superimposed and is organic. Rhythm and metre may be said to set each other off like colours shot. In a film it is the caesura alone whose recurrence is frequent and regular enough to warrant its use as the basis of cinematic metre.

Rhythm appears to be most obviously successful in a film when motional and emotional rhythms alternate, and the appeal to the spectator is at once visual and mental, there being no question of doing away with the subject nor of leaving anyone free to concentrate on the visual realisation alone, since that, rather than emphasise rhythm, would destroy it altogether.

The device where part of the action passes on a moving vehicle, whether car, tram, bus, or train, has (of course) been a favourite one with the producers of comedies ever since the earliest days of the cinema. But its possibilities can best be seen in such intelligently made films as Buster Keaton’s General, Harold Lloyd’s For Heaven’s Sake, and Charlie Chaplin’s infinitely more subtle Pay Day, where a service of midnight buses, which poor Charlie seems fated not to catch, act as metronomes and imprint their peculiar rhythm on the close of the film. Such motional scenes must be made with great restraint if they are to prove successful. Although movement is the breath of life to the cinema, yet it is of no use to photograph movement and nothing but movement. Without continued reference to the norm anything extraordinary eventually becomes meaningless and commonplace. Movement loses its effect if it is not contrasted with the firm and well-set earth. That is why, when Harold Lloyd gets on a bus with a handful of drunk men, it is necessary for the camera to pretend not only that it too is on the bus in order to photograph their antics at close quarters, but.also that it is a common pedestrian on the sidewalk who sees this strangely driven vehicle come careering down the street towards him. Similarly, in Vaudeville, the audience in the Winter Garden sees the acrobats swinging like little white pendulums high up in the roof of the hall; and the acrobats see the audience, walls, lights in the ceiling, walls, audience far below them, walls, lights in the ceiling, in one continuous flux and reflux. Giddiness.

It is not so easy to give examples of how emotion may be deployed from shot to shot. To take a simple case: when in the Ufa production of Cinderella the sister cut her foot in order to fit it to the shoe, the Succeeding scenes where she appears, pale and suffering, in her bridal robes and leaning on her mother’s arm, would have lacked their tense rhythm, had not the audience known that every movement she made must have been agony, and that she was only supported by her mother’s determination. Better still, the opening of Chaplin’s Pilgrim:—First shot: A warder comes out of a prison-gate and pastes a notice on the wall. A close-up of the notice reveals information about an escaped convict and a photo of Charlie. Second shot: A bather re. turns to find his clothes gone and a convict’s uniform left in their place, Third shot: A curate walking up a Station platform. A gust of wind blows off his hat. He retrieves it and turns round. It is Charlie. Three strands making a single knot.

If cinematic metre is caesural, it follows that it is of the greatest importance that the cesuras should occur at the correct moments in a film ; that is to say, that the shots should be of the tight length, neither too long nor too short, and that they should be combined with each other in the best order. When this is has been done well by a film-editor, the result ought to be perfectly balanced and satisfying. But who is to say whether the censors and exhibitors of the world will allow such a film to be shown in its perfect mint form? As is well known, each country, each town, has its board of censors: the result is that Russian films are almost taboo in Western Europe, the true Metropolis may not be shown in England, nor the true Vaudeville in Birmingham, and even Chaplin (on the merest whisper of “divorce’’) is liable to be banned in Chicago and the United States. Metropolis as seen in England was quite different from the-original film: thrills were deleted, a dance scene banned, the whole moral of the story altered: consequently the acting became illogical, the psychology false, and the balance and rhythm of the original film completely wrecked. Yet Dawn, though banned by Sir Austen Chamberlain in England, was shown wherever the local authorities chose to license it.”

This is a disgraceful state of affairs, The cinema, unlike literature, is an immediately international art. It is already much more international than music or painting can hope to become for many years, despite cheap colour printing and the radio. Not only does a film ignore frontiers like an aeroplane, but it comes nearer the heart of mankind than any of the other arts. If the muses may be suspected of political tendencies, the deity that presides over the cinema is certainly Socialist. As Walt Whitman cried when he had succeeded in enticing the Muse over from empty Parnassus to the New York Exposition, “ She’s here, installed amid the kitchen ware!”’—he might have added prophetically, “the Cinderella of the arts.” Although so young, the cinema has proved its worth, to judge from the influence it has already exerted on the other arts. What modern ballet owes it can be seen from La Pastorale ad the slow-motion scenes in The Blue Train and Apollo Musagetes. Even James Joyce in Tristan and Isolda seems to be emulating the universality of the cinema in his attempt to break down the barriers of language by using words or word-fractions taken indiscriminately from about a dozen different tongues. And the works of Cendrars and Ramuz are widely known. ‘The cinema is too old still to be treated as a naughty child. And yet the censor seems to find it necessary to mutilate masterpieces like Vaudeville and Metropolis (and, for that matter, Chaplin’s Woman of Paris) before they can be shown in this country. 

Could we not take a salutary lesson from Germany? There The Cruiser Potemkin was first shown with cuts, most of these coming in the famous Odessa Steps’ scene. Naturally Meisel’s music had to be similarly mutilated to match. But when early in 1928 the censor licensed the whole of Eisenstein’s later, but less successful, film, October, or Ten Days that Shook the World, there remained no adequate reason why the Potemkin should still be banned. With considerable wisdom the censor rescinded his decree and at last allowed this masterpiece to be shown in its entirety. Only then could the full effect of the Steps’ scene be judged, one of the most perfect rhythmic episodes in any film. Given the visual: metre of the long glissando of the steps, descending terrace by terrace, Eisenstein superimposed on it four different movements: (1) The regular descent of the firing-line, step by step, step by step—Fire! (This movement emphasised strongly the metre of the steps.) (2) The panic of the crowd flying helter-skelter, those shot falling dead, those wounded trying to crawl into safety. (3) The contrary motion of the mother, who, finding her son shot dead by her side, picked up his body and returned with it to defy the firing-line. (4) The young widow, who, being shot, fell against her baby’s perambulator so that it began to bump down the steps; bump, bump, bump—a short landing— and then, bump, bump, bump, bump, again. This movement was the most surprising of all, because the most incongruous; yet it, together with a great part of (3), had been entirely cut away from the first version. As shown in Berlin in 1928, this scene was perfect with the tragic perfection of the opening movement of Beethoven’s Last Symphony ; whereas such deliberately thought-out rhythmic constructions as Lotte Reiniger’s silhouette films, Achmet and Cinderella, can never achieve more than the delicate perfection of Cimarosa.

Then, let what cutting has to be done be done at the time that a film is edited. for it is almost entirely to the editor of film that its ultimate rhythm is due, and any later alteration of his work will only upset the balance of the whole. How much depends on careful editing can be seen from a comparison of Vaudeville with Chaplin’s Gold Rush. It is one of the signs of Chaplin’s genius that he never holds a scene too long. In The Gold Rush there is a moment when Charlie prepares a New Year's Eve party, the guests do not turn up, and the whole film is on the point of sliding into the most embarrassing sentimentality. A moment longer and the thing were done. But that moment never comes. Just on the right side of time Chaplin switches off and executes the miraculous Oceana Roll. The situation is saved by one of the most brilliant moments in the whole history of the cinema. In Vaudeville, however, the tempo of the film is deliberately slowed up in order to give the murder scene a ponderous impressivity. But it is undoubtedly slowed up just a fraction too much. The impassivity of Emil Jannings ceases to awe one and begins to become slightly ludicrous—a dangerous thing to happen at the climax of any film. Had the editor cut two or three seconds, no more, off the length of most of the shots, that mistake would have been avoided (although it is always possible that those few seconds represent just the difference between the Teutonic and the British temperaments). 

But, the point to be emphasised is this, that cutting is primarily the duty of the film editor, and not of any haphazard board of censors. Any later interference with a film is bound to upset the continuity of both its metre and rhythm, to react unfavourably on the minds and nervous systems of the audience, and to give as unsatisfactory results as a performance of Beethoven’s Eroica with the “false horn entry” removed, or an exhibition of Raphael’s Transfiguration with the figure of the epileptic boy and his outstretched arms cut out. Perhaps a solution of these difficulties would be for the League of Nations to set up an international board of censors that should pass all films or cause them to be modified, once and for all. But that, no doubt, is too simple an ideal for these hard times. Oxford–Clifton–Potsdam.